The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Blue Fairy Book
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Blue Fairy Book

Author: Andrew Lang

Release date: October 21, 2005 [eBook #503]
                Most recently updated: March 2, 2011

Language: English

Credits: Produced by David Widger, and Charles Keller for Tina


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLUE FAIRY BOOK ***




Produced by Charles Keller for Tina





THE BLUE FAIRY BOOK

By Various

Edited by Andrew Lang



CONTENTS


     THE BRONZE RING
     PRINCE HYACINTH AND THE DEAR LITTLE PRINCESS
     EAST OF THE SUN AND WEST OF THE MOON
     THE YELLOW DWARF
     LITTLE RED RIDING-HOOD
     THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD
     CINDERELLA; OR, THE LITTLE GLASS SLIPPER
     ALADDIN AND THE WONDERFUL LAMP
     THE TALE OF A YOUTH WHO SET OUT TO LEARN WHAT FEAR WAS
     RUMPELSTILTZKIN
     BEAUTY AND THE BEAST
     THE MASTER-MAID
     WHY THE SEA IS SALT
     THE MASTER CAT; OR, PUSS IN BOOTS
     FELICIA AND THE POT OF PINKS
     THE WHITE CAT
     THE WATER-LILY. THE GOLD-SPINNERS
     THE TERRIBLE HEAD
     THE STORY OF PRETTY GOLDILOCKS
     THE HISTORY OF WHITTINGTON
     THE WONDERFUL SHEEP
     LITTLE THUMB
     THE FORTY THIEVES
     HANSEL AND GRETTEL
     SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED
     THE GOOSE-GIRL
     TOADS AND DIAMONDS
     PRINCE DARLING
     BLUE BEARD
     TRUSTY JOHN
     THE BRAVE LITTLE TAILOR
     A VOYAGE TO LILLIPUT
     THE PRINCESS ON THE GLASS HILL
     THE STORY OF PRINCE AHMED AND THE FAIRY PARIBANOU
     THE HISTORY OF JACK THE GIANT-KILLER
     THE BLACK BULL OF NORROWAY
     THE RED ETIN




THE BRONZE RING


Once upon a time in a certain country there lived a king whose palace
was surrounded by a spacious garden. But, though the gardeners were many
and the soil was good, this garden yielded neither flowers nor fruits,
not even grass or shady trees.

The King was in despair about it, when a wise old man said to him:

"Your gardeners do not understand their business: but what can you
expect of men whose fathers were cobblers and carpenters? How should
they have learned to cultivate your garden?"

"You are quite right," cried the King.

"Therefore," continued the old man, "you should send for a gardener
whose father and grandfather have been gardeners before him, and very
soon your garden will be full of green grass and gay flowers, and you
will enjoy its delicious fruit."

So the King sent messengers to every town, village, and hamlet in his
dominions, to look for a gardener whose forefathers had been gardeners
also, and after forty days one was found.

"Come with us and be gardener to the King," they said to him.

"How can I go to the King," said the gardener, "a poor wretch like me?"

"That is of no consequence," they answered. "Here are new clothes for
you and your family."

"But I owe money to several people."

"We will pay your debts," they said.

So the gardener allowed himself to be persuaded, and went away with
the messengers, taking his wife and his son with him; and the King,
delighted to have found a real gardener, entrusted him with the care
of his garden. The man found no difficulty in making the royal garden
produce flowers and fruit, and at the end of a year the park was not
like the same place, and the King showered gifts upon his new servant.

The gardener, as you have heard already, had a son, who was a very
handsome young man, with most agreeable manners, and every day he
carried the best fruit of the garden to the King, and all the prettiest
flowers to his daughter. Now this princess was wonderfully pretty and
was just sixteen years old, and the King was beginning to think it was
time that she should be married.

"My dear child," said he, "you are of an age to take a husband,
therefore I am thinking of marrying you to the son of my prime minister.

"Father," replied the Princess, "I will never marry the son of the
minister."

"Why not?" asked the King.

"Because I love the gardener's son," answered the Princess.

On hearing this the King was at first very angry, and then he wept and
sighed, and declared that such a husband was not worthy of his daughter;
but the young Princess was not to be turned from her resolution to marry
the gardener's son.

Then the King consulted his ministers. "This is what you must do," they
said. "To get rid of the gardener you must send both suitors to a
very distant country, and the one who returns first shall marry your
daughter."

The King followed this advice, and the minister's son was presented with
a splendid horse and a purse full of gold pieces, while the gardener's
son had only an old lame horse and a purse full of copper money, and
every one thought he would never come back from his journey.

The day before they started the Princess met her lover and said to him:

"Be brave, and remember always that I love you. Take this purse full of
jewels and make the best use you can of them for love of me, and come
back quickly and demand my hand."

The two suitors left the town together, but the minister's son went off
at a gallop on his good horse, and very soon was lost to sight behind
the most distant hills. He traveled on for some days, and presently
reached a fountain beside which an old woman all in rags sat upon a
stone.

"Good-day to you, young traveler," said she.

But the minister's son made no reply.

"Have pity upon me, traveler," she said again. "I am dying of hunger,
as you see, and three days have I been here and no one has given me
anything."

"Let me alone, old witch," cried the young man; "I can do nothing for
you," and so saying he went on his way.

That same evening the gardener's son rode up to the fountain upon his
lame gray horse.

"Good-day to you, young traveler," said the beggar-woman.

"Good-day, good woman," answered he.

"Young traveler, have pity upon me."

"Take my purse, good woman," said he, "and mount behind me, for your
legs can't be very strong."

The old woman didn't wait to be asked twice, but mounted behind him,
and in this style they reached the chief city of a powerful kingdom. The
minister's son was lodged in a grand inn, the gardener's son and the old
woman dismounted at the inn for beggars.

The next day the gardener's son heard a great noise in the street, and
the King's heralds passed, blowing all kinds of instruments, and crying:

"The King, our master, is old and infirm. He will give a great reward to
whoever will cure him and give him back the strength of his youth."

Then the old beggar-woman said to her benefactor:

"This is what you must do to obtain the reward which the King promises.
Go out of the town by the south gate, and there you will find three
little dogs of different colors; the first will be white, the second
black, the third red. You must kill them and then burn them separately,
and gather up the ashes. Put the ashes of each dog into a bag of its own
color, then go before the door of the palace and cry out, 'A celebrated
physician has come from Janina in Albania. He alone can cure the King
and give him back the strength of his youth.' The King's physicians will
say, This is an impostor, and not a learned man,' and they will make all
sorts of difficulties, but you will overcome them all at last, and will
present yourself before the sick King. You must then demand as much wood
as three mules can carry, and a great cauldron, and must shut yourself
up in a room with the Sultan, and when the cauldron boils you must throw
him into it, and there leave him until his flesh is completely separated
from his bones. Then arrange the bones in their proper places, and throw
over them the ashes out of the three bags. The King will come back to
life, and will be just as he was when he was twenty years old. For your
reward you must demand the bronze ring which has the power to grant
you everything you desire. Go, my son, and do not forget any of my
instructions."

The young man followed the old beggar-woman's directions. On going out
of the town he found the white, red, and black dogs, and killed and
burnt them, gathering the ashes in three bags. Then he ran to the palace
and cried:

"A celebrated physician has just come from Janina in Albania. He alone
can cure the King and give him back the strength of his youth."

The King's physicians at first laughed at the unknown wayfarer, but the
Sultan ordered that the stranger should be admitted. They brought the
cauldron and the loads of wood, and very soon the King was boiling away.
Toward mid-day the gardener's son arranged the bones in their places,
and he had hardly scattered the ashes over them before the old King
revived, to find himself once more young and hearty.

"How can I reward you, my benefactor?" he cried. "Will you take half my
treasures?"

"No," said the gardener's son.

"My daughter's hand?"

"_No_."

"Take half my kingdom."

"No. Give me only the bronze ring which can instantly grant me anything
I wish for."

"Alas!" said the King, "I set great store by that marvelous ring;
nevertheless, you shall have it." And he gave it to him.

The gardener's son went back to say good-by to the old beggar-woman;
then he said to the bronze ring:

"Prepare a splendid ship in which I may continue my journey. Let the
hull be of fine gold, the masts of silver, the sails of brocade; let
the crew consist of twelve young men of noble appearance, dressed like
kings. St. Nicholas will be at the helm. As to the cargo, let it be
diamonds, rubies, emeralds, and carbuncles."

And immediately a ship appeared upon the sea which resembled in every
particular the description given by the gardener's son, and, stepping
on board, he continued his journey. Presently he arrived at a great town
and established himself in a wonderful palace. After several days he
met his rival, the minister's son, who had spent all his money and was
reduced to the disagreeable employment of a carrier of dust and rubbish.
The gardener's son said to him:

"What is your name, what is your family, and from what country do you
come?"

"I am the son of the prime minister of a great nation, and yet see what
a degrading occupation I am reduced to."

"Listen to me; though I don't know anything more about you, I am willing
to help you. I will give you a ship to take you back to your own country
upon one condition."

"Whatever it may be, I accept it willingly."

"Follow me to my palace."

The minister's son followed the rich stranger, whom he had not
recognized. When they reached the palace the gardener's son made a sign
to his slaves, who completely undressed the new-comer.

"Make this ring red-hot," commanded the master, "and mark the man with
it upon his back."

The slaves obeyed him.

"Now, young man," said the rich stranger, "I am going to give you a
vessel which will take you back to your own country."

And, going out, he took the bronze ring and said:

"Bronze ring, obey thy master. Prepare me a ship of which the
half-rotten timbers shall be painted black, let the sails be in rags,
and the sailors infirm and sickly. One shall have lost a leg, another
an arm, the third shall be a hunchback, another lame or club-footed or
blind, and most of them shall be ugly and covered with scars. Go, and
let my orders be executed."

The minister's son embarked in this old vessel, and thanks to favorable
winds, at length reached his own country. In spite of the pitiable
condition in which he returned they received him joyfully.

"I am the first to come back," said he to the King; now fulfil your
promise, and give me the princess in marriage.

So they at once began to prepare for the wedding festivities. As to the
poor princess, she was sorrowful and angry enough about it.

The next morning, at daybreak, a wonderful ship with every sail set came
to anchor before the town. The King happened at that moment to be at the
palace window.

"What strange ship is this," he cried, "that has a golden hull, silver
masts, and silken sails, and who are the young men like princes who man
it? And do I not see St. Nicholas at the helm? Go at once and invite the
captain of the ship to come to the palace."

His servants obeyed him, and very soon in came an enchantingly handsome
young prince, dressed in rich silk, ornamented with pearls and diamonds.

"Young man," said the King, "you are welcome, whoever you may be. Do me
the favor to be my guest as long as you remain in my capital."

"Many thanks, sire," replied the captain, "I accept your offer."

"My daughter is about to be married," said the King; "will you give her
away?"

"I shall be charmed, sire."

Soon after came the Princess and her betrothed.

"Why, how is this?" cried the young captain; "would you marry this
charming princess to such a man as that?"

"But he is my prime minister's son!"

"What does that matter? I cannot give your daughter away. The man she is
betrothed to is one of my servants."

"Your servant?"

"Without doubt. I met him in a distant town reduced to carrying away
dust and rubbish from the houses. I had pity on him and engaged him as
one of my servants."

"It is impossible!" cried the King.

"Do you wish me to prove what I say? This young man returned in a vessel
which I fitted out for him, an unseaworthy ship with a black battered
hull, and the sailors were infirm and crippled."

"It is quite true," said the King.

"It is false," cried the minister's son. "I do not know this man!"

"Sire," said the young captain, "order your daughter's betrothed to be
stripped, and see if the mark of my ring is not branded upon his back."

The King was about to give this order, when the minister's son, to save
himself from such an indignity, admitted that the story was true.

"And now, sire," said the young captain, "do you not recognize me?"

"I recognize you," said the Princess; "you are the gardener's son whom I
have always loved, and it is you I wish to marry."

"Young man, you shall be my son-in-law," cried the King. "The marriage
festivities are already begun, so you shall marry my daughter this very
day."

And so that very day the gardener's son married the beautiful Princess.

Several months passed. The young couple were as happy as the day was
long, and the King was more and more pleased with himself for having
secured such a son-in-law.

But, presently, the captain of the golden ship found it necessary to
take a long voyage, and after embracing his wife tenderly he embarked.

Now in the outskirts of the capital there lived an old man, who had
spent his life in studying black arts--alchemy, astrology, magic,
and enchantment. This man found out that the gardener's son had only
succeeded in marrying the Princess by the help of the genii who obeyed
the bronze ring.

"I will have that ring," said he to himself. So he went down to the
sea-shore and caught some little red fishes. Really, they were
quite wonderfully pretty. Then he came back, and, passing before the
Princess's window, he began to cry out:

"Who wants some pretty little red fishes?"

The Princess heard him, and sent out one of her slaves, who said to the
old peddler:

"What will you take for your fish?"

"A bronze ring."

"A bronze ring, old simpleton! And where shall I find one?"

"Under the cushion in the Princess's room."

The slave went back to her mistress.

"The old madman will take neither gold nor silver," said she.

"What does he want then?"

"A bronze ring that is hidden under a cushion."

"Find the ring and give it to him," said the Princess.

And at last the slave found the bronze ring, which the captain of the
golden ship had accidentally left behind and carried it to the man, who
made off with it instantly.

Hardly had he reached his own house when, taking the ring, he said,
"Bronze ring, obey thy master. I desire that the golden ship shall turn
to black wood, and the crew to hideous negroes; that St. Nicholas shall
leave the helm and that the only cargo shall be black cats."

And the genii of the bronze ring obeyed him.

Finding himself upon the sea in this miserable condition, the young
captain understood that some one must have stolen the bronze ring from
him, and he lamented his misfortune loudly; but that did him no good.

"Alas!" he said to himself, "whoever has taken my ring has probably
taken my dear wife also. What good will it do me to go back to my own
country?" And he sailed about from island to island, and from shore to
shore, believing that wherever he went everybody was laughing at him,
and very soon his poverty was so great that he and his crew and the poor
black cats had nothing to eat but herbs and roots. After wandering about
a long time he reached an island inhabited by mice. The captain landed
upon the shore and began to explore the country. There were mice
everywhere, and nothing but mice. Some of the black cats had followed
him, and, not having been fed for several days, they were fearfully
hungry, and made terrible havoc among the mice.

Then the queen of the mice held a council.

"These cats will eat every one of us," she said, "if the captain of the
ship does not shut the ferocious animals up. Let us send a deputation to
him of the bravest among us."

Several mice offered themselves for this mission and set out to find the
young captain.

"Captain," said they, "go away quickly from our island, or we shall
perish, every mouse of us."

"Willingly," replied the young captain, "upon one condition. That is
that you shall first bring me back a bronze ring which some clever
magician has stolen from me. If you do not do this I will land all my
cats upon your island, and you shall be exterminated."

The mice withdrew in great dismay. "What is to be done?" said the Queen.
"How can we find this bronze ring?" She held a new council, calling in
mice from every quarter of the globe, but nobody knew where the bronze
ring was. Suddenly three mice arrived from a very distant country. One
was blind, the second lame, and the third had her ears cropped.

"Ho, ho, ho!" said the new-comers. "We come from a far distant country."

"Do you know where the bronze ring is which the genii obey?"

"Ho, ho, ho! we know; an old sorcerer has taken possession of it, and
now he keeps it in his pocket by day and in his mouth by night."

"Go and take it from him, and come back as soon as possible."

So the three mice made themselves a boat and set sail for the magician's
country. When they reached the capital they landed and ran to the
palace, leaving only the blind mouse on the shore to take care of the
boat. Then they waited till it was night. The wicked old man lay down in
bed and put the bronze ring into his mouth, and very soon he was asleep.

"Now, what shall we do?" said the two little animals to each other.

The mouse with the cropped ears found a lamp full of oil and a bottle
full of pepper. So she dipped her tail first in the oil and then in the
pepper, and held it to the sorcerer's nose.

"Atisha! atisha!" sneezed the old man, but he did not wake, and the
shock made the bronze ring jump out of his mouth. Quick as thought the
lame mouse snatched up the precious talisman and carried it off to the
boat.

Imagine the despair of the magician when he awoke and the bronze ring
was nowhere to be found!

But by that time our three mice had set sail with their prize. A
favoring breeze was carrying them toward the island where the queen
of the mice was awaiting them. Naturally they began to talk about the
bronze ring.

"Which of us deserves the most credit?" they cried all at once.

"I do," said the blind mouse, "for without my watchfulness our boat
would have drifted away to the open sea."

"No, indeed," cried the mouse with the cropped ears; "the credit is
mine. Did I not cause the ring to jump out of the man's mouth?"

"No, it is mine," cried the lame one, "for I ran off with the ring."

And from high words they soon came to blows, and, alas! when the quarrel
was fiercest the bronze ring fell into the sea.

"How are we to face our queen," said the three mice "when by our
folly we have lost the talisman and condemned our people to be utterly
exterminated? We cannot go back to our country; let us land on this
desert island and there end our miserable lives." No sooner said than
done. The boat reached the island, and the mice landed.

The blind mouse was speedily deserted by her two sisters, who went off
to hunt flies, but as she wandered sadly along the shore she found a
dead fish, and was eating it, when she felt something very hard. At her
cries the other two mice ran up.

"It is the bronze ring! It is the talisman!" they cried joyfully, and,
getting into their boat again, they soon reached the mouse island. It
was time they did, for the captain was just going to land his cargo of
cats, when a deputation of mice brought him the precious bronze ring.

"Bronze ring," commanded the young man, "obey thy master. Let my ship
appear as it was before."

Immediately the genii of the ring set to work, and the old black vessel
became once more the wonderful golden ship with sails of brocade; the
handsome sailors ran to the silver masts and the silken ropes, and very
soon they set sail for the capital.

Ah! how merrily the sailors sang as they flew over the glassy sea!

At last the port was reached.

The captain landed and ran to the palace, where he found the wicked
old man asleep. The Princess clasped her husband in a long embrace. The
magician tried to escape, but he was seized and bound with strong cords.

The next day the sorcerer, tied to the tail of a savage mule loaded with
nuts, was broken into as many pieces as there were nuts upon the mule's
back.(1)


(1) Traditions Populaires de l'Asie Mineure. Carnoy et Nicolaides.
Paris: Maisonneuve, 1889.




PRINCE HYACINTH AND THE DEAR LITTLE PRINCESS


Once upon a time there lived a king who was deeply in love with a
princess, but she could not marry anyone, because she was under an
enchantment. So the King set out to seek a fairy, and asked what he
could do to win the Princess's love. The Fairy said to him:

"You know that the Princess has a great cat which she is very fond of.
Whoever is clever enough to tread on that cat's tail is the man she is
destined to marry."

The King said to himself that this would not be very difficult, and he
left the Fairy, determined to grind the cat's tail to powder rather than
not tread on it at all.

You may imagine that it was not long before he went to see the Princess,
and puss, as usual, marched in before him, arching his back. The King
took a long step, and quite thought he had the tail under his foot, but
the cat turned round so sharply that he only trod on air. And so it went
on for eight days, till the King began to think that this fatal tail
must be full of quicksilver--it was never still for a moment.

At last, however, he was lucky enough to come upon puss fast asleep and
with his tail conveniently spread out. So the King, without losing a
moment, set his foot upon it heavily.

With one terrific yell the cat sprang up and instantly changed into a
tall man, who, fixing his angry eyes upon the King, said:

"You shall marry the Princess because you have been able to break the
enchantment, but I will have my revenge. You shall have a son, who will
never be happy until he finds out that his nose is too long, and if you
ever tell anyone what I have just said to you, you shall vanish away
instantly, and no one shall ever see you or hear of you again."

Though the King was horribly afraid of the enchanter, he could not help
laughing at this threat.

"If my son has such a long nose as that," he said to himself, "he
must always see it or feel it; at least, if he is not blind or without
hands."

But, as the enchanter had vanished, he did not waste any more time in
thinking, but went to seek the Princess, who very soon consented to
marry him. But after all, they had not been married very long when the
King died, and the Queen had nothing left to care for but her little
son, who was called Hyacinth. The little Prince had large blue eyes, the
prettiest eyes in the world, and a sweet little mouth, but, alas!
his nose was so enormous that it covered half his face. The Queen was
inconsolable when she saw this great nose, but her ladies assured her
that it was not really as large as it looked; that it was a Roman nose,
and you had only to open any history to see that every hero has a large
nose. The Queen, who was devoted to her baby, was pleased with what they
told her, and when she looked at Hyacinth again, his nose certainly did
not seem to her _quite_ so large.

The Prince was brought up with great care; and, as soon as he could
speak, they told him all sorts of dreadful stories about people who had
short noses. No one was allowed to come near him whose nose did not more
or less resemble his own, and the courtiers, to get into favor with the
Queen, took to pulling their babies' noses several times every day
to make them grow long. But, do what they would, they were nothing by
comparison with the Prince's.

When he grew sensible he learned history; and whenever any great prince
or beautiful princess was spoken of, his teachers took care to tell him
that they had long noses.

His room was hung with pictures, all of people with very large noses;
and the Prince grew up so convinced that a long nose was a great beauty,
that he would not on any account have had his own a single inch shorter!

When his twentieth birthday was passed the Queen thought it was time
that he should be married, so she commanded that the portraits of
several princesses should be brought for him to see, and among the
others was a picture of the Dear Little Princess!

Now, she was the daughter of a great king, and would some day possess
several kingdoms herself; but Prince Hyacinth had not a thought to spare
for anything of that sort, he was so much struck with her beauty. The
Princess, whom he thought quite charming, had, however, a little saucy
nose, which, in her face, was the prettiest thing possible, but it was
a cause of great embarrassment to the courtiers, who had got into such
a habit of laughing at little noses that they sometimes found themselves
laughing at hers before they had time to think; but this did not do at
all before the Prince, who quite failed to see the joke, and actually
banished two of his courtiers who had dared to mention disrespectfully
the Dear Little Princess's tiny nose!

The others, taking warning from this, learned to think twice before they
spoke, and one even went so far as to tell the Prince that, though it
was quite true that no man could be worth anything unless he had a
long nose, still, a woman's beauty was a different thing; and he knew
a learned man who understood Greek and had read in some old manuscripts
that the beautiful Cleopatra herself had a "tip-tilted" nose!

The Prince made him a splendid present as a reward for this good
news, and at once sent ambassadors to ask the Dear Little Princess in
marriage. The King, her father, gave his consent; and Prince Hyacinth,
who, in his anxiety to see the Princess, had gone three leagues to meet
her was just advancing to kiss her hand when, to the horror of all who
stood by, the enchanter appeared as suddenly as a flash of lightning,
and, snatching up the Dear Little Princess, whirled her away out of
their sight!

The Prince was left quite unconsolable, and declared that nothing should
induce him to go back to his kingdom until he had found her again, and
refusing to allow any of his courtiers to follow him, he mounted his
horse and rode sadly away, letting the animal choose his own path.

So it happened that he came presently to a great plain, across which
he rode all day long without seeing a single house, and horse and rider
were terribly hungry, when, as the night fell, the Prince caught sight
of a light, which seemed to shine from a cavern.

He rode up to it, and saw a little old woman, who appeared to be at
least a hundred years old.

She put on her spectacles to look at Prince Hyacinth, but it was quite
a long time before she could fix them securely because her nose was so
very short.

The Prince and the Fairy (for that was who she was) had no sooner looked
at one another than they went into fits of laughter, and cried at the
same moment, "Oh, what a funny nose!"

"Not so funny as your own," said Prince Hyacinth to the Fairy; "but,
madam, I beg you to leave the consideration of our noses--such as
they are--and to be good enough to give me something to eat, for I am
starving, and so is my poor horse."

"With all my heart," said the Fairy. "Though your nose is so ridiculous
you are, nevertheless, the son of my best friend. I loved your father as
if he had been my brother. Now _he_ had a very handsome nose!"

"And pray what does mine lack?" said the Prince.

"Oh! it doesn't _lack_ anything," replied the Fairy. "On the contrary
quite, there is only too much of it. But never mind, one may be a very
worthy man though his nose is too long. I was telling you that I was
your father's friend; he often came to see me in the old times, and you
must know that I was very pretty in those days; at least, he used to say
so. I should like to tell you of a conversation we had the last time I
ever saw him."

"Indeed," said the Prince, "when I have supped it will give me the
greatest pleasure to hear it; but consider, madam, I beg of you, that I
have had nothing to eat to-day."

"The poor boy is right," said the Fairy; "I was forgetting. Come in,
then, and I will give you some supper, and while you are eating I can
tell you my story in a very few words--for I don't like endless tales
myself. Too long a tongue is worse than too long a nose, and I remember
when I was young that I was so much admired for not being a great
chatterer. They used to tell the Queen, my mother, that it was so. For
though you see what I am now, I was the daughter of a great king. My
father----"

"Your father, I dare say, got something to eat when he was hungry!"
interrupted the Prince.

"Oh! certainly," answered the Fairy, "and you also shall have supper
directly. I only just wanted to tell you----"

"But I really cannot listen to anything until I have had something
to eat," cried the Prince, who was getting quite angry; but then,
remembering that he had better be polite as he much needed the Fairy's
help, he added:

"I know that in the pleasure of listening to you I should quite forget
my own hunger; but my horse, who cannot hear you, must really be fed!"

The Fairy was very much flattered by this compliment, and said, calling
to her servants:

"You shall not wait another minute, you are so polite, and in spite of
the enormous size of your nose you are really very agreeable."

"Plague take the old lady! How she does go on about my nose!" said the
Prince to himself. "One would almost think that mine had taken all the
extra length that hers lacks! If I were not so hungry I would soon have
done with this chatterpie who thinks she talks very little! How stupid
people are not to see their own faults! That comes of being a princess:
she has been spoiled by flatterers, who have made her believe that she
is quite a moderate talker!"

Meanwhile the servants were putting the supper on the table, and the
prince was much amused to hear the Fairy who asked them a thousand
questions simply for the pleasure of hearing herself speak; especially
he noticed one maid who, no matter what was being said, always contrived
to praise her mistress's wisdom.

"Well!" he thought, as he ate his supper, "I'm very glad I came here.
This just shows me how sensible I have been in never listening to
flatterers. People of that sort praise us to our faces without shame,
and hide our faults or change them into virtues. For my part I never
will be taken in by them. I know my own defects, I hope."

Poor Prince Hyacinth! He really believed what he said, and hadn't an
idea that the people who had praised his nose were laughing at him, just
as the Fairy's maid was laughing at her; for the Prince had seen her
laugh slyly when she could do so without the Fairy's noticing her.

However, he said nothing, and presently, when his hunger began to be
appeased, the Fairy said:

"My dear Prince, might I beg you to move a little more that way, for
your nose casts such a shadow that I really cannot see what I have on my
plate. Ah! thanks. Now let us speak of your father. When I went to his
Court he was only a little boy, but that is forty years ago, and I have
been in this desolate place ever since. Tell me what goes on nowadays;
are the ladies as fond of amusement as ever? In my time one saw them at
parties, theatres, balls, and promenades every day. Dear me! _what_ a
long nose you have! I cannot get used to it!"

"Really, madam," said the Prince, "I wish you would leave off mentioning
my nose. It cannot matter to you what it is like. I am quite satisfied
with it, and have no wish to have it shorter. One must take what is
given one."

"Now you are angry with me, my poor Hyacinth," said the Fairy, "and I
assure you that I didn't mean to vex you; on the contrary, I wished to
do you a service. However, though I really cannot help your nose being a
shock to me, I will try not to say anything about it. I will even try to
think that you have an ordinary nose. To tell the truth, it would make
three reasonable ones."

The Prince, who was no longer hungry, grew so impatient at the Fairy's
continual remarks about his nose that at last he threw himself upon his
horse and rode hastily away. But wherever he came in his journeyings he
thought the people were mad, for they all talked of his nose, and yet
he could not bring himself to admit that it was too long, he had been so
used all his life to hear it called handsome.

The old Fairy, who wished to make him happy, at last hit upon a plan.
She shut the Dear Little Princess up in a palace of crystal, and put
this palace down where the Prince would not fail to find it. His joy at
seeing the Princess again was extreme, and he set to work with all his
might to try to break her prison; but in spite of all his efforts he
failed utterly. In despair he thought at least that he would try to
get near enough to speak to the Dear Little Princess, who, on her part,
stretched out her hand that he might kiss it; but turn which way he
might, he never could raise it to his lips, for his long nose always
prevented it. For the first time he realized how long it really was, and
exclaimed:

"Well, it must be admitted that my nose _is_ too long!"

In an instant the crystal prison flew into a thousand splinters, and
the old Fairy, taking the Dear Little Princess by the hand, said to the
Prince:

"Now, say if you are not very much obliged to me. Much good it was for
me to talk to you about your nose! You would never have found out how
extraordinary it was if it hadn't hindered you from doing what you
wanted to. You see how self-love keeps us from knowing our own defects
of mind and body. Our reason tries in vain to show them to us; we refuse
to see them till we find them in the way of our interests."

Prince Hyacinth, whose nose was now just like anyone's else, did not
fail to profit by the lesson he had received. He married the Dear Little
Princess, and they lived happily ever after.(1)


(1) Le Prince Desir et la Princesse Mignonne. Par Madame Leprince de
Beaumont.




EAST OF THE SUN AND WEST OF THE MOON


Once upon a time there was a poor husbandman who had many children and
little to give them in the way either of food or clothing. They were all
pretty, but the prettiest of all was the youngest daughter, who was so
beautiful that there were no bounds to her beauty.

So once--it was late on a Thursday evening in autumn, and wild weather
outside, terribly dark, and raining so heavily and blowing so hard that
the walls of the cottage shook again--they were all sitting together by
the fireside, each of them busy with something or other, when suddenly
some one rapped three times against the window-pane. The man went out
to see what could be the matter, and when he got out there stood a great
big white bear.

"Good-evening to you," said the White Bear.

"Good-evening," said the man.

"Will you give me your youngest daughter?" said the White Bear; "if you
will, you shall be as rich as you are now poor."

Truly the man would have had no objection to be rich, but he thought to
himself: "I must first ask my daughter about this," so he went in and
told them that there was a great white bear outside who had faithfully
promised to make them all rich if he might but have the youngest
daughter.

She said no, and would not hear of it; so the man went out again, and
settled with the White Bear that he should come again next Thursday
evening, and get her answer. Then the man persuaded her, and talked so
much to her about the wealth that they would have, and what a good thing
it would be for herself, that at last she made up her mind to go, and
washed and mended all her rags, made herself as smart as she could, and
held herself in readiness to set out. Little enough had she to take away
with her.

Next Thursday evening the White Bear came to fetch her. She seated
herself on his back with her bundle, and thus they departed. When they
had gone a great part of the way, the White Bear said: "Are you afraid?"

"No, that I am not," said she.

"Keep tight hold of my fur, and then there is no danger," said he.

And thus she rode far, far away, until they came to a great mountain.
Then the White Bear knocked on it, and a door opened, and they went into
a castle where there were many brilliantly lighted rooms which shone
with gold and silver, likewise a large hall in which there was a
well-spread table, and it was so magnificent that it would be hard to
make anyone understand how splendid it was. The White Bear gave her a
silver bell, and told her that when she needed anything she had but
to ring this bell, and what she wanted would appear. So after she had
eaten, and night was drawing near, she grew sleepy after her journey,
and thought she would like to go to bed. She rang the bell, and scarcely
had she touched it before she found herself in a chamber where a bed
stood ready made for her, which was as pretty as anyone could wish to
sleep in. It had pillows of silk, and curtains of silk fringed with
gold, and everything that was in the room was of gold or silver, but
when she had lain down and put out the light a man came and lay down
beside her, and behold it was the White Bear, who cast off the form of
a beast during the night. She never saw him, however, for he always came
after she had put out her light, and went away before daylight appeared.

So all went well and happily for a time, but then she began to be very
sad and sorrowful, for all day long she had to go about alone; and
she did so wish to go home to her father and mother and brothers and
sisters. Then the White Bear asked what it was that she wanted, and she
told him that it was so dull there in the mountain, and that she had to
go about all alone, and that in her parents' house at home there were
all her brothers and sisters, and it was because she could not go to
them that she was so sorrowful.

"There might be a cure for that," said the White Bear, "if you would
but promise me never to talk with your mother alone, but only when the
others are there too; for she will take hold of your hand," he said,
"and will want to lead you into a room to talk with you alone; but that
you must by no means do, or you will bring great misery on both of us."

So one Sunday the White Bear came and said that they could now set out
to see her father and mother, and they journeyed thither, she sitting on
his back, and they went a long, long way, and it took a long, long time;
but at last they came to a large white farmhouse, and her brothers and
sisters were running about outside it, playing, and it was so pretty
that it was a pleasure to look at it.

"Your parents dwell here now," said the White Bear; "but do not forget
what I said to you, or you will do much harm both to yourself and me."

"No, indeed," said she, "I shall never forget;" and as soon as she was
at home the White Bear turned round and went back again.

There were such rejoicings when she went in to her parents that it
seemed as if they would never come to an end. Everyone thought that he
could never be sufficiently grateful to her for all she had done for
them all. Now they had everything that they wanted, and everything was
as good as it could be. They all asked her how she was getting on where
she was. All was well with her too, she said; and she had everything
that she could want. What other answers she gave I cannot say, but I am
pretty sure that they did not learn much from her. But in the afternoon,
after they had dined at midday, all happened just as the White Bear had
said. Her mother wanted to talk with her alone in her own chamber. But
she remembered what the White Bear had said, and would on no account go.
"What we have to say can be said at any time," she answered. But somehow
or other her mother at last persuaded her, and she was forced to tell
the whole story. So she told how every night a man came and lay down
beside her when the lights were all put out, and how she never saw him,
because he always went away before it grew light in the morning, and how
she continually went about in sadness, thinking how happy she would
be if she could but see him, and how all day long she had to go about
alone, and it was so dull and solitary. "Oh!" cried the mother, in
horror, "you are very likely sleeping with a troll! But I will teach you
a way to see him. You shall have a bit of one of my candles, which you
can take away with you hidden in your breast. Look at him with that when
he is asleep, but take care not to let any tallow drop upon him."

So she took the candle, and hid it in her breast, and when evening drew
near the White Bear came to fetch her away. When they had gone some
distance on their way, the White Bear asked her if everything had not
happened just as he had foretold, and she could not but own that it had.
"Then, if you have done what your mother wished," said he, "you have
brought great misery on both of us." "No," she said, "I have not done
anything at all." So when she had reached home and had gone to bed it
was just the same as it had been before, and a man came and lay down
beside her, and late at night, when she could hear that he was sleeping,
she got up and kindled a light, lit her candle, let her light shine on
him, and saw him, and he was the handsomest prince that eyes had ever
beheld, and she loved him so much that it seemed to her that she must
die if she did not kiss him that very moment. So she did kiss him; but
while she was doing it she let three drops of hot tallow fall upon
his shirt, and he awoke. "What have you done now?" said he; "you have
brought misery on both of us. If you had but held out for the space of
one year I should have been free. I have a step-mother who has bewitched
me so that I am a white bear by day and a man by night; but now all is
at an end between you and me, and I must leave you, and go to her. She
lives in a castle which lies east of the sun and west of the moon, and
there too is a princess with a nose which is three ells long, and she
now is the one whom I must marry."

She wept and lamented, but all in vain, for go he must. Then she asked
him if she could not go with him. But no, that could not be. "Can you
tell me the way then, and I will seek you--that I may surely be allowed
to do!"

"Yes, you may do that," said he; "but there is no way thither. It lies
east of the sun and west of the moon, and never would you find your way
there."

When she awoke in the morning both the Prince and the castle were gone,
and she was lying on a small green patch in the midst of a dark, thick
wood. By her side lay the self-same bundle of rags which she had brought
with her from her own home. So when she had rubbed the sleep out of her
eyes, and wept till she was weary, she set out on her way, and thus she
walked for many and many a long day, until at last she came to a great
mountain. Outside it an aged woman was sitting, playing with a golden
apple. The girl asked her if she knew the way to the Prince who lived
with his stepmother in the castle which lay east of the sun and west of
the moon, and who was to marry a princess with a nose which was three
ells long. "How do you happen to know about him?" inquired the old
woman; "maybe you are she who ought to have had him." "Yes, indeed, I
am," she said. "So it is you, then?" said the old woman; "I know nothing
about him but that he dwells in a castle which is east of the sun and
west of the moon. You will be a long time in getting to it, if ever you
get to it at all; but you shall have the loan of my horse, and then you
can ride on it to an old woman who is a neighbor of mine: perhaps she
can tell you about him. When you have got there you must just strike the
horse beneath the left ear and bid it go home again; but you may take
the golden apple with you."

So the girl seated herself on the horse, and rode for a long, long way,
and at last she came to the mountain, where an aged woman was sitting
outside with a gold carding-comb. The girl asked her if she knew the way
to the castle which lay east of the sun and west of the moon; but she
said what the first old woman had said: "I know nothing about it, but
that it is east of the sun and west of the moon, and that you will be a
long time in getting to it, if ever you get there at all; but you shall
have the loan of my horse to an old woman who lives the nearest to me:
perhaps she may know where the castle is, and when you have got to her
you may just strike the horse beneath the left ear and bid it go home
again." Then she gave her the gold carding-comb, for it might, perhaps,
be of use to her, she said.

So the girl seated herself on the horse, and rode a wearisome long way
onward again, and after a very long time she came to a great mountain,
where an aged woman was sitting, spinning at a golden spinning-wheel.
Of this woman, too, she inquired if she knew the way to the Prince, and
where to find the castle which lay east of the sun and west of the moon.
But it was only the same thing once again. "Maybe it was you who should
have had the Prince," said the old woman. "Yes, indeed, I should have
been the one," said the girl. But this old crone knew the way no better
than the others--it was east of the sun and west of the moon, she knew
that, "and you will be a long time in getting to it, if ever you get
to it at all," she said; "but you may have the loan of my horse, and I
think you had better ride to the East Wind, and ask him: perhaps he may
know where the castle is, and will blow you thither. But when you have
got to him you must just strike the horse beneath the left ear, and he
will come home again." And then she gave her the golden spinning-wheel,
saying: "Perhaps you may find that you have a use for it."

The girl had to ride for a great many days, and for a long and wearisome
time, before she got there; but at last she did arrive, and then she
asked the East Wind if he could tell her the way to the Prince who dwelt
east of the sun and west of the moon. "Well," said the East Wind, "I
have heard tell of the Prince, and of his castle, but I do not know the
way to it, for I have never blown so far; but, if you like, I will go
with you to my brother the West Wind: he may know that, for he is much
stronger than I am. You may sit on my back, and then I can carry you
there." So she seated herself on his back, and they did go so swiftly!
When they got there, the East Wind went in and said that the girl whom
he had brought was the one who ought to have had the Prince up at the
castle which lay east of the sun and west of the moon, and that now she
was traveling about to find him again, so he had come there with her,
and would like to hear if the West Wind knew whereabout the castle was.
"No," said the West Wind; "so far as that have I never blown; but if you
like I will go with you to the South Wind, for he is much stronger than
either of us, and he has roamed far and wide, and perhaps he can tell
you what you want to know. You may seat yourself on my back, and then I
will carry you to him.".

So she did this, and journeyed to the South Wind, neither was she very
long on the way. When they had got there, the West Wind asked him if he
could tell her the way to the castle that lay east of the sun and west
of the moon, for she was the girl who ought to marry the Prince who
lived there. "Oh, indeed!" said the South Wind, "is that she? Well,"
said he, "I have wandered about a great deal in my time, and in all
kinds of places, but I have never blown so far as that. If you like,
however, I will go with you to my brother, the North Wind; he is the
oldest and strongest of all of us, and if he does not know where it is
no one in the whole world will be able to tell you. You may sit upon
my back, and then I will carry you there." So she seated herself on his
back, and off he went from his house in great haste, and they were not
long on the way. When they came near the North Wind's dwelling, he was
so wild and frantic that they felt cold gusts a long while before they
got there. "What do you want?" he roared out from afar, and they froze
as they heard. Said the South Wind: "It is I, and this is she who should
have had the Prince who lives in the castle which lies east of the sun
and west of the moon. And now she wishes to ask you if you have ever
been there, and can tell her the way, for she would gladly find him
again."

"Yes," said the North Wind, "I know where it is. I once blew an aspen
leaf there, but I was so tired that for many days afterward I was not
able to blow at all. However, if you really are anxious to go there, and
are not afraid to go with me, I will take you on my back, and try if I
can blow you there."

"Get there I must," said she; "and if there is any way of going I will;
and I have no fear, no matter how fast you go."

"Very well then," said the North Wind; "but you must sleep here
to-night, for if we are ever to get there we must have the day before
us."

The North Wind woke her betimes next morning, and puffed himself up, and
made himself so big and so strong that it was frightful to see him, and
away they went, high up through the air, as if they would not stop until
they had reached the very end of the world. Down below there was such a
storm! It blew down woods and houses, and when they were above the sea
the ships were wrecked by hundreds. And thus they tore on and on, and
a long time went by, and then yet more time passed, and still they were
above the sea, and the North Wind grew tired, and more tired, and at
last so utterly weary that he was scarcely able to blow any longer, and
he sank and sank, lower and lower, until at last he went so low that the
waves dashed against the heels of the poor girl he was carrying. "Art
thou afraid?" said the North Wind. "I have no fear," said she; and it
was true. But they were not very, very far from land, and there was just
enough strength left in the North Wind to enable him to throw her on to
the shore, immediately under the windows of a castle which lay east of
the sun and west of the moon; but then he was so weary and worn out that
he was forced to rest for several days before he could go to his own
home again.

Next morning she sat down beneath the walls of the castle to play with
the golden apple, and the first person she saw was the maiden with the
long nose, who was to have the Prince. "How much do you want for that
gold apple of yours, girl?" said she, opening the window. "It can't be
bought either for gold or money," answered the girl. "If it cannot be
bought either for gold or money, what will buy it? You may say what you
please," said the Princess.

"Well, if I may go to the Prince who is here, and be with him to-night,
you shall have it," said the girl who had come with the North Wind. "You
may do that," said the Princess, for she had made up her mind what she
would do. So the Princess got the golden apple, but when the girl went
up to the Prince's apartment that night he was asleep, for the Princess
had so contrived it. The poor girl called to him, and shook him, and
between whiles she wept; but she could not wake him. In the morning, as
soon as day dawned, in came the Princess with the long nose, and drove
her out again. In the daytime she sat down once more beneath the windows
of the castle, and began to card with her golden carding-comb; and then
all happened as it had happened before. The Princess asked her what she
wanted for it, and she replied that it was not for sale, either for gold
or money, but that if she could get leave to go to the Prince, and be
with him during the night, she should have it. But when she went up to
the Prince's room he was again asleep, and, let her call him, or shake
him, or weep as she would, he still slept on, and she could not put any
life in him. When daylight came in the morning, the Princess with the
long nose came too, and once more drove her away. When day had quite
come, the girl seated herself under the castle windows, to spin with
her golden spinning-wheel, and the Princess with the long nose wanted to
have that also. So she opened the window, and asked what she would
take for it. The girl said what she had said on each of the former
occasions--that it was not for sale either for gold or for money, but if
she could get leave to go to the Prince who lived there, and be with him
during the night, she should have it.

"Yes," said the Princess, "I will gladly consent to that."

But in that place there were some Christian folk who had been carried
off, and they had been sitting in the chamber which was next to that of
the Prince, and had heard how a woman had been in there who had wept and
called on him two nights running, and they told the Prince of this. So
that evening, when the Princess came once more with her sleeping-drink,
he pretended to drink, but threw it away behind him, for he suspected
that it was a sleeping-drink. So, when the girl went into the Prince's
room this time he was awake, and she had to tell him how she had come
there. "You have come just in time," said the Prince, "for I should have
been married to-morrow; but I will not have the long-nosed Princess, and
you alone can save me. I will say that I want to see what my bride can
do, and bid her wash the shirt which has the three drops of tallow on
it. This she will consent to do, for she does not know that it is you
who let them fall on it; but no one can wash them out but one born of
Christian folk: it cannot be done by one of a pack of trolls; and then
I will say that no one shall ever be my bride but the woman who can do
this, and I know that you can." There was great joy and gladness between
them all that night, but the next day, when the wedding was to take
place, the Prince said, "I must see what my bride can do." "That you may
do," said the stepmother.

"I have a fine shirt which I want to wear as my wedding shirt, but three
drops of tallow have got upon it which I want to have washed off, and
I have vowed to marry no one but the woman who is able to do it. If she
cannot do that, she is not worth having."

Well, that was a very small matter, they thought, and agreed to do it.
The Princess with the long nose began to wash as well as she could,
but, the more she washed and rubbed, the larger the spots grew. "Ah! you
can't wash at all," said the old troll-hag, who was her mother. "Give it
to me." But she too had not had the shirt very long in her hands before
it looked worse still, and, the more she washed it and rubbed it, the
larger and blacker grew the spots.

So the other trolls had to come and wash, but, the more they did, the
blacker and uglier grew the shirt, until at length it was as black as if
it had been up the chimney. "Oh," cried the Prince, "not one of you is
good for anything at all! There is a beggar-girl sitting outside the
window, and I'll be bound that she can wash better than any of you! Come
in, you girl there!" he cried. So she came in. "Can you wash this shirt
clean?" he cried. "Oh! I don't know," she said; "but I will try." And
no sooner had she taken the shirt and dipped it in the water than it
was white as driven snow, and even whiter than that. "I will marry you,"
said the Prince.

Then the old troll-hag flew into such a rage that she burst, and the
Princess with the long nose and all the little trolls must have burst
too, for they have never been heard of since. The Prince and his bride
set free all the Christian folk who were imprisoned there, and took away
with them all the gold and silver that they could carry, and moved far
away from the castle which lay east of the sun and west of the moon.(1)


(1) Asbjornsen and Moe.




THE YELLOW DWARF


Once upon a time there lived a queen who had been the mother of a great
many children, and of them all only one daughter was left. But then
_she_ was worth at least a thousand.

Her mother, who, since the death of the King, her father, had nothing in
the world she cared for so much as this little Princess, was so terribly
afraid of losing her that she quite spoiled her, and never tried to
correct any of her faults. The consequence was that this little person,
who was as pretty as possible, and was one day to wear a crown, grew
up so proud and so much in love with her own beauty that she despised
everyone else in the world.

The Queen, her mother, by her caresses and flatteries, helped to make
her believe that there was nothing too good for her. She was dressed
almost always in the prettiest frocks, as a fairy, or as a queen going
out to hunt, and the ladies of the Court followed her dressed as forest
fairies.

And to make her more vain than ever the Queen caused her portrait to be
taken by the cleverest painters and sent it to several neighboring kings
with whom she was very friendly.

When they saw this portrait they fell in love with the Princess--every
one of them, but upon each it had a different effect. One fell ill, one
went quite crazy, and a few of the luckiest set off to see her as soon
as possible, but these poor princes became her slaves the moment they
set eyes on her.

Never has there been a gayer Court. Twenty delightful kings did
everything they could think of to make themselves agreeable, and after
having spent ever so much money in giving a single entertainment thought
themselves very lucky if the Princess said "That's pretty."

All this admiration vastly pleased the Queen. Not a day passed but
she received seven or eight thousand sonnets, and as many elegies,
madrigals, and songs, which were sent her by all the poets in the
world. All the prose and the poetry that was written just then was about
Bellissima--for that was the Princess's name--and all the bonfires that
they had were made of these verses, which crackled and sparkled better
than any other sort of wood.

Bellissima was already fifteen years old, and every one of the Princes
wished to marry her, but not one dared to say so. How could they when
they knew that any of them might have cut off his head five or six times
a day just to please her, and she would have thought it a mere trifle,
so little did she care? You may imagine how hard-hearted her lovers
thought her; and the Queen, who wished to see her married, did not know
how to persuade her to think of it seriously.

"Bellissima," she said, "I do wish you would not be so proud. What makes
you despise all these nice kings? I wish you to marry one of them, and
you do not try to please me."

"I am so happy," Bellissima answered: "do leave me in peace, madam. I
don't want to care for anyone."

"But you would be very happy with any of these Princes," said the Queen,
"and I shall be very angry if you fall in love with anyone who is not
worthy of you."

But the Princess thought so much of herself that she did not consider
any one of her lovers clever or handsome enough for her; and her mother,
who was getting really angry at her determination not to be married,
began to wish that she had not allowed her to have her own way so much.

At last, not knowing what else to do, she resolved to consult a certain
witch who was called "The Fairy of the Desert." Now this was very
difficult to do, as she was guarded by some terrible lions; but happily
the Queen had heard a long time before that whoever wanted to pass
these lions safely must throw to them a cake made of millet flour,
sugar-candy, and crocodile's eggs. This cake she prepared with her own
hands, and putting it in a little basket, she set out to seek the Fairy.
But as she was not used to walking far, she soon felt very tired and sat
down at the foot of a tree to rest, and presently fell fast asleep. When
she awoke she was dismayed to find her basket empty. The cake was all
gone! and, to make matters worse, at that moment she heard the roaring
of the great lions, who had found out that she was near and were coming
to look for her.

"What shall I do?" she cried; "I shall be eaten up," and being too
frightened to run a single step, she began to cry, and leaned against
the tree under which she had been asleep.

Just then she heard some one say: "H'm, h'm!"

She looked all round her, and then up the tree, and there she saw a
little tiny man, who was eating oranges.

"Oh! Queen," said he, "I know you very well, and I know how much afraid
you are of the lions; and you are quite right too, for they have eaten
many other people: and what can you expect, as you have not any cake to
give them?"

"I must make up my mind to die," said the poor Queen. "Alas! I should
not care so much if only my dear daughter were married."

"Oh! you have a daughter," cried the Yellow Dwarf (who was so called
because he _was_ a dwarf and had such a yellow face, and lived in the
orange tree). "I'm really glad to hear that, for I've been looking for
a wife all over the world. Now, if you will promise that she shall marry
me, not one of the lions, tigers, or bears shall touch you."

The Queen looked at him and was almost as much afraid of his ugly little
face as she had been of the lions before, so that she could not speak a
word.

"What! you hesitate, madam," cried the Dwarf. "You must be very fond of
being eaten up alive."

And, as he spoke, the Queen saw the lions, which were running down a
hill toward them.

Each one had two heads, eight feet, and four rows of teeth, and their
skins were as hard as turtle shells, and were bright red.

At this dreadful sight, the poor Queen, who was trembling like a dove
when it sees a hawk, cried out as loud as she could, "Oh! dear Mr.
Dwarf, Bellissima shall marry you."

"Oh, indeed!" said he disdainfully. "Bellissima is pretty enough, but I
don't particularly want to marry her--you can keep her."

"Oh! noble sir," said the Queen in great distress, "do not refuse her.
She is the most charming Princess in the world."

"Oh! well," he replied, "out of charity I will take her; but be sure and
don't forget that she is mine."

As he spoke a little door opened in the trunk of the orange tree, in
rushed the Queen, only just in time, and the door shut with a bang in
the faces of the lions.

The Queen was so confused that at first she did not notice another
little door in the orange tree, but presently it opened and she found
herself in a field of thistles and nettles. It was encircled by a muddy
ditch, and a little further on was a tiny thatched cottage, out of which
came the Yellow Dwarf with a very jaunty air. He wore wooden shoes and
a little yellow coat, and as he had no hair and very long ears he looked
altogether a shocking little object.

"I am delighted," said he to the Queen, "that, as you are to be my
mother-in-law, you should see the little house in which your Bellissima
will live with me. With these thistles and nettles she can feed a donkey
which she can ride whenever she likes; under this humble roof no
weather can hurt her; she will drink the water of this brook and eat
frogs--which grow very fat about here; and then she will have me always
with her, handsome, agreeable, and gay as you see me now. For if her
shadow stays by her more closely than I do I shall be surprised."

The unhappy Queen, seeing all at once what a miserable life her daughter
would have with this Dwarf could not bear the idea, and fell down
insensible without saying a word.

When she revived she found to her great surprise that she was lying in
her own bed at home, and, what was more, that she had on the loveliest
lace night cap that she had ever seen in her life. At first she thought
that all her adventures, the terrible lions, and her promise to the
Yellow Dwarf that he should marry Bellissima, must have been a dream,
but there was the new cap with its beautiful ribbon and lace to remind
her that it was all true, which made her so unhappy that she could
neither eat, drink, nor sleep for thinking of it.

The Princess, who, in spite of her wilfulness, really loved her mother
with all her heart, was much grieved when she saw her looking so sad,
and often asked her what was the matter; but the Queen, who didn't want
her to find out the truth, only said that she was ill, or that one of
her neighbors was threatening to make war against her. Bellissima knew
quite well that something was being hidden from her--and that neither of
these was the real reason of the Queen's uneasiness. So she made up her
mind that she would go and consult the Fairy of the Desert about it,
especially as she had often heard how wise she was, and she thought that
at the same time she might ask her advice as to whether it would be as
well to be married, or not.

So, with great care, she made some of the proper cake to pacify the
lions, and one night went up to her room very early, pretending that
she was going to bed; but instead of that, she wrapped herself in a long
white veil, and went down a secret staircase, and set off all by herself
to find the Witch.

But when she got as far as the same fatal orange tree, and saw it
covered with flowers and fruit, she stopped and began to gather some
of the oranges--and then, putting down her basket, she sat down to eat
them. But when it was time to go on again the basket had disappeared
and, though she looked everywhere, not a trace of it could she find.
The more she hunted for it, the more frightened she got, and at last she
began to cry. Then all at once she saw before her the Yellow Dwarf.

"What's the matter with you, my pretty one?" said he. "What are you
crying about?"

"Alas!" she answered; "no wonder that I am crying, seeing that I have
lost the basket of cake that was to help me to get safely to the cave of
the Fairy of the Desert."

"And what do you want with her, pretty one?" said the little monster,
"for I am a friend of hers, and, for the matter of that, I am quite as
clever as she is."

"The Queen, my mother," replied the Princess, "has lately fallen into
such deep sadness that I fear that she will die; and I am afraid that
perhaps I am the cause of it, for she very much wishes me to be married,
and I must tell you truly that as yet I have not found anyone I consider
worthy to be my husband. So for all these reasons I wished to talk to
the Fairy."

"Do not give yourself any further trouble, Princess," answered the
Dwarf. "I can tell you all you want to know better than she could. The
Queen, your mother, has promised you in marriage----"

"Has promised _me!_" interrupted the Princess. "Oh! no. I'm sure she has
not. She would have told me if she had. I am too much interested in
the matter for her to promise anything without my consent--you must be
mistaken."

"Beautiful Princess," cried the Dwarf suddenly, throwing himself on his
knees before her, "I flatter myself that you will not be displeased
at her choice when I tell you that it is to _me_ she has promised the
happiness of marrying you."

"You!" cried Bellissima, starting back. "My mother wishes me to marry
you! How can you be so silly as to think of such a thing?"

"Oh! it isn't that I care much to have that honor," cried the Dwarf
angrily; "but here are the lions coming; they'll eat you up in three
mouthfuls, and there will be an end of you and your pride."

And, indeed, at that moment the poor Princess heard their dreadful howls
coming nearer and nearer.

"What shall I do?" she cried. "Must all my happy days come to an end
like this?"

The malicious Dwarf looked at her and began to laugh spitefully. "At
least," said he, "you have the satisfaction of dying unmarried. A lovely
Princess like you must surely prefer to die rather than be the wife of a
poor little dwarf like myself."

"Oh, don't be angry with me," cried the Princess, clasping her hands.
"I'd rather marry all the dwarfs in the world than die in this horrible
way."

"Look at me well, Princess, before you give me your word," said he. "I
don't want you to promise me in a hurry."

"Oh!" cried she, "the lions are coming. I have looked at you enough. I
am so frightened. Save me this minute, or I shall die of terror."

Indeed, as she spoke she fell down insensible, and when she recovered
she found herself in her own little bed at home; how she got there
she could not tell, but she was dressed in the most beautiful lace and
ribbons, and on her finger was a little ring, made of a single red hair,
which fitted so tightly that, try as she might, she could not get it
off.

When the Princess saw all these things, and remembered what had
happened, she, too, fell into the deepest sadness, which surprised and
alarmed the whole Court, and the Queen more than anyone else. A hundred
times she asked Bellissima if anything was the matter with her; but she
always said that there was nothing.

At last the chief men of the kingdom, anxious to see their Princess
married, sent to the Queen to beg her to choose a husband for her as
soon as possible. She replied that nothing would please her better, but
that her daughter seemed so unwilling to marry, and she recommended them
to go and talk to the Princess about it themselves so this they at once
did. Now Bellissima was much less proud since her adventure with the
Yellow Dwarf, and she could not think of a better way of getting rid
of the little monster than to marry some powerful king, therefore she
replied to their request much more favorably than they had hoped, saying
that, though she was very happy as she was, still, to please them, she
would consent to marry the King of the Gold Mines. Now he was a very
handsome and powerful Prince, who had been in love with the Princess for
years, but had not thought that she would ever care about him at all.
You can easily imagine how delighted he was when he heard the news,
and how angry it made all the other kings to lose for ever the hope of
marrying the Princess; but, after all, Bellissima could not have married
twenty kings--indeed, she had found it quite difficult enough to choose
one, for her vanity made her believe that there was nobody in the world
who was worthy of her.

Preparations were begun at once for the grandest wedding that had ever
been held at the palace. The King of the Gold Mines sent such immense
sums of money that the whole sea was covered with the ships that brought
it. Messengers were sent to all the gayest and most refined Courts,
particularly to the Court of France, to seek out everything rare and
precious to adorn the Princess, although her beauty was so perfect that
nothing she wore could make her look prettier. At least that is what
the King of the Gold Mines thought, and he was never happy unless he was
with her.

As for the Princess, the more she saw of the King the more she liked
him; he was so generous, so handsome and clever, that at last she was
almost as much in love with him as he was with her. How happy they were
as they wandered about in the beautiful gardens together, sometimes
listening to sweet music! And the King used to write songs for
Bellissima. This is one that she liked very much:

  In the forest all is gay
  When my Princess walks that way.
  All the blossoms then are found
  Downward fluttering to the ground,
  Hoping she may tread on them.
  And bright flowers on slender stem
  Gaze up at her as she passes
  Brushing lightly through the grasses.
  Oh! my Princess, birds above
  Echo back our songs of love,
  As through this enchanted land
  Blithe we wander, hand in hand.


They really were as happy as the day was long. All the King's
unsuccessful rivals had gone home in despair. They said good-by to the
Princess so sadly that she could not help being sorry for them.

"Ah! madam," the King of the Gold Mines said to her "how is this? Why
do you waste your pity on these princes, who love you so much that all
their trouble would be well repaid by a single smile from you?"

"I should be sorry," answered Bellissima, "if you had not noticed how
much I pitied these princes who were leaving me for ever; but for you,
sire, it is very different: you have every reason to be pleased with
me, but they are going sorrowfully away, so you must not grudge them my
compassion."

The King of the Gold Mines was quite overcome by the Princess's
good-natured way of taking his interference, and, throwing himself at
her feet, he kissed her hand a thousand times and begged her to forgive
him.

At last the happy day came. Everything was ready for Bellissima's
wedding. The trumpets sounded, all the streets of the town were hung
with flags and strewn with flowers, and the people ran in crowds to the
great square before the palace. The Queen was so overjoyed that she had
hardly been able to sleep at all, and she got up before it was light to
give the necessary orders and to choose the jewels that the Princess was
to wear. These were nothing less than diamonds, even to her shoes, which
were covered with them, and her dress of silver brocade was embroidered
with a dozen of the sun's rays. You may imagine how much these had cost;
but then nothing could have been more brilliant, except the beauty of
the Princess! Upon her head she wore a splendid crown, her lovely
hair waved nearly to her feet, and her stately figure could easily be
distinguished among all the ladies who attended her.

The King of the Gold Mines was not less noble and splendid; it was easy
to see by his face how happy he was, and everyone who went near him
returned loaded with presents, for all round the great banqueting hall
had been arranged a thousand barrels full of gold, and numberless bags
made of velvet embroidered with pearls and filled with money, each one
containing at least a hundred thousand gold pieces, which were given
away to everyone who liked to hold out his hand, which numbers of people
hastened to do, you may be sure--indeed, some found this by far the most
amusing part of the wedding festivities.

The Queen and the Princess were just ready to set out with the King when
they saw, advancing toward them from the end of the long gallery, two
great basilisks, dragging after them a very badly made box; behind them
came a tall old woman, whose ugliness was even more surprising than her
extreme old age. She wore a ruff of black taffeta, a red velvet hood,
and a farthingale all in rags, and she leaned heavily upon a crutch.
This strange old woman, without saying a single word, hobbled three
times round the gallery, followed by the basilisks, then stopping in the
middle, and brandishing her crutch threateningly, she cried:

"Ho, ho, Queen! Ho, ho, Princess! Do you think you are going to break
with impunity the promise that you made to my friend the Yellow Dwarf? I
am the Fairy of the Desert; without the Yellow Dwarf and his orange
tree my great lions would soon have eaten you up, I can tell you, and in
Fairyland we do not suffer ourselves to be insulted like this. Make up
your minds at once what you will do, for I vow that you shall marry the
Yellow Dwarf. If you don't, may I burn my crutch!"

"Ah! Princess," said the Queen, weeping, "what is this that I hear? What
have you promised?"

"Ah! my mother," replied Bellissima sadly, "what did _you_ promise,
yourself?"

The King of the Gold Mines, indignant at being kept from his happiness
by this wicked old woman, went up to her, and threatening her with his
sword, said:

"Get away out of my country at once, and for ever, miserable creature,
lest I take your life, and so rid myself of your malice."

He had hardly spoken these words when the lid of the box fell back on
the floor with a terrible noise, and to their horror out sprang the
Yellow Dwarf, mounted upon a great Spanish cat. "Rash youth!" he cried,
rushing between the Fairy of the Desert and the King. "Dare to lay a
finger upon this illustrious Fairy! Your quarrel is with me only. I
am your enemy and your rival. That faithless Princess who would have
married you is promised to me. See if she has not upon her finger a ring
made of one of my hairs. Just try to take it off, and you will soon find
out that I am more powerful than you are!"

"Wretched little monster!" said the King; "do you dare to call yourself
the Princess's lover, and to lay claim to such a treasure? Do you know
that you are a dwarf--that you are so ugly that one cannot bear to look
at you--and that I should have killed you myself long before this if you
had been worthy of such a glorious death?"

The Yellow Dwarf, deeply enraged at these words, set spurs to his
cat, which yelled horribly, and leaped hither and thither--terrifying
everybody except the brave King, who pursued the Dwarf closely, till he,
drawing a great knife with which he was armed, challenged the King to
meet him in single combat, and rushed down into the courtyard of the
palace with a terrible clatter. The King, quite provoked, followed him
hastily, but they had hardly taken their places facing one another, and
the whole Court had only just had time to rush out upon the balconies to
watch what was going on, when suddenly the sun became as red as blood,
and it was so dark that they could scarcely see at all. The thunder
crashed, and the lightning seemed as if it must burn up everything; the
two basilisks appeared, one on each side of the bad Dwarf, like giants,
mountains high, and fire flew from their mouths and ears, until they
looked like flaming furnaces. None of these things could terrify the
noble young King, and the boldness of his looks and actions reassured
those who were looking on, and perhaps even embarrassed the Yellow Dwarf
himself; but even _his_ courage gave way when he saw what was happening
to his beloved Princess. For the Fairy of the Desert, looking more
terrible than before, mounted upon a winged griffin, and with long
snakes coiled round her neck, had given her such a blow with the lance
she carried that Bellissima fell into the Queen's arms bleeding and
senseless. Her fond mother, feeling as much hurt by the blow as the
Princess herself, uttered such piercing cries and lamentations that
the King, hearing them, entirely lost his courage and presence of mind.
Giving up the combat, he flew toward the Princess, to rescue or to die
with her; but the Yellow Dwarf was too quick for him. Leaping with his
Spanish cat upon the balcony, he snatched Bellissima from the Queen's
arms, and before any of the ladies of the Court could stop him he had
sprung upon the roof of the palace and disappeared with his prize.

The King, motionless with horror, looked on despairingly at this
dreadful occurrence, which he was quite powerless to prevent, and to
make matters worse his sight failed him, everything became dark, and he
felt himself carried along through the air by a strong hand.

This new misfortune was the work of the wicked Fairy of the Desert, who
had come with the Yellow Dwarf to help him carry off the Princess,
and had fallen in love with the handsome young King of the Gold Mines
directly she saw him. She thought that if she carried him off to some
frightful cavern and chained him to a rock, then the fear of death would
make him forget Bellissima and become her slave. So, as soon as they
reached the place, she gave him back his sight, but without releasing
him from his chains, and by her magic power she appeared before him as
a young and beautiful fairy, and pretended to have come there quite by
chance.

"What do I see?" she cried. "Is it _you_, dear Prince? What misfortune
has brought you to this dismal place?"

The King, who was quite deceived by her altered appearance, replied:

"Alas! beautiful Fairy, the fairy who brought me here first took away
my sight, but by her voice I recognized her as the Fairy of the Desert,
though what she should have carried me off for I cannot tell you."

"Ah!" cried the pretended Fairy, "if you have fallen into _her_ hands,
you won't get away until you have married her. She has carried off more
than one Prince like this, and she will certainly have anything she
takes a fancy to." While she was thus pretending to be sorry for the
King, he suddenly noticed her feet, which were like those of a griffin,
and knew in a moment that this must be the Fairy of the Desert, for her
feet were the one thing she could not change, however pretty she might
make her face.

Without seeming to have noticed anything, he said, in a confidential
way:

"Not that I have any dislike to the Fairy of the Desert, but I really
cannot endure the way in which she protects the Yellow Dwarf and keeps
me chained here like a criminal. It is true that I love a charming
princess, but if the Fairy should set me free my gratitude would oblige
me to love her only."

"Do you really mean what you say, Prince?" said the Fairy, quite
deceived.

"Surely," replied the Prince; "how could I deceive you? You see it is
so much more flattering to my vanity to be loved by a fairy than by
a simple princess. But, even if I am dying of love for her, I shall
pretend to hate her until I am set free."

The Fairy of the Desert, quite taken in by these words, resolved at once
to transport the Prince to a pleasanter place. So, making him mount
her chariot, to which she had harnessed swans instead of the bats which
generally drew it, away she flew with him. But imagine the distress
of the Prince when, from the giddy height at which they were rushing
through the air, he saw his beloved Princess in a castle built of
polished steel, the walls of which reflected the sun's rays so
hotly that no one could approach it without being burnt to a cinder!
Bellissima was sitting in a little thicket by a brook, leaning her head
upon her hand and weeping bitterly, but just as they passed she looked
up and saw the King and the Fairy of the Desert. Now, the Fairy was so
clever that she could not only seem beautiful to the King, but even the
poor Princess thought her the most lovely being she had ever seen.

"What!" she cried; "was I not unhappy enough in this lonely castle to
which that frightful Yellow Dwarf brought me? Must I also be made to
know that the King of the Gold Mines ceased to love me as soon as he
lost sight of me? But who can my rival be, whose fatal beauty is greater
than mine?"

While she was saying this, the King, who really loved her as much as
ever, was feeling terribly sad at being so rapidly torn away from his
beloved Princess, but he knew too well how powerful the Fairy was to
have any hope of escaping from her except by great patience and cunning.

The Fairy of the Desert had also seen Bellissima, and she tried to read
in the King's eyes the effect that this unexpected sight had had upon
him.

"No one can tell you what you wish to know better than I can," said
he. "This chance meeting with an unhappy princess for whom I once had a
passing fancy, before I was lucky enough to meet you, has affected me a
little, I admit, but you are so much more to me than she is that I would
rather die than leave you."

"Ah, Prince," she said, "can I believe that you really love me so much?"

"Time will show, madam," replied the King; "but if you wish to convince
me that you have some regard for me, do not, I beg of you, refuse to aid
Bellissima."

"Do you know what you are asking?" said the Fairy of the Desert,
frowning, and looking at him suspiciously. "Do you want me to employ my
art against the Yellow Dwarf, who is my best friend, and take away from
him a proud princess whom I can but look upon as my rival?"

The King sighed, but made no answer--indeed, what was there to be said
to such a clear-sighted person? At last they reached a vast meadow, gay
with all sorts of flowers; a deep river surrounded it, and many little
brooks murmured softly under the shady trees, where it was always cool
and fresh. A little way off stood a splendid palace, the walls of
which were of transparent emeralds. As soon as the swans which drew
the Fairy's chariot had alighted under a porch, which was paved with
diamonds and had arches of rubies, they were greeted on all sides by
thousands of beautiful beings, who came to meet them joyfully, singing
these words:

  "When Love within a heart would reign,
       Useless to strive against him 'tis.
  The proud but feel a sharper pain,
       And make a greater triumph his."


The Fairy of the Desert was delighted to hear them sing of her triumphs;
she led the King into the most splendid room that can be imagined, and
left him alone for a little while, just that he might not feel that
he was a prisoner; but he felt sure that she had not really gone quite
away, but was watching him from some hiding-place. So walking up to a
great mirror, he said to it, "Trusty counsellor, let me see what I can
do to make myself agreeable to the charming Fairy of the Desert; for I
can think of nothing but how to please her."

And he at once set to work to curl his hair, and, seeing upon a table a
grander coat than his own, he put it on carefully. The Fairy came back
so delighted that she could not conceal her joy.

"I am quite aware of the trouble you have taken to please me," said she,
"and I must tell you that you have succeeded perfectly already. You see
it is not difficult to do if you really care for me."

The King, who had his own reasons for wishing to keep the old Fairy in
a good humor, did not spare pretty speeches, and after a time he was
allowed to walk by himself upon the sea-shore. The Fairy of the Desert
had by her enchantments raised such a terrible storm that the boldest
pilot would not venture out in it, so she was not afraid of her
prisoner's being able to escape; and he found it some relief to think
sadly over his terrible situation without being interrupted by his cruel
captor.

Presently, after walking wildly up and down, he wrote these verses upon
the sand with his stick:

     "At last may I upon this shore
       Lighten my sorrow with soft tears.
     Alas! alas! I see no more
       My Love, who yet my sadness cheers.

     "And thou, O raging, stormy Sea,
       Stirred by wild winds, from depth to height,
     Thou hold'st my loved one far from me,
       And I am captive to thy might.

     "My heart is still more wild than thine,
       For Fate is cruel unto me.
     Why must I thus in exile pine?
       Why is my Princess snatched from me?

     "O! lovely Nymphs, from ocean caves,
       Who know how sweet true love may be,
     Come up and calm the furious waves
       And set a desperate lover free!"


While he was still writing he heard a voice which attracted his
attention in spite of himself. Seeing that the waves were rolling in
higher than ever, he looked all round, and presently saw a lovely lady
floating gently toward him upon the crest of a huge billow, her long
hair spread all about her; in one hand she held a mirror, and in the
other a comb, and instead of feet she had a beautiful tail like a fish,
with which she swam.

The King was struck dumb with astonishment at this unexpected sight; but
as soon as she came within speaking distance, she said to him, "I know
how sad you are at losing your Princess and being kept a prisoner by
the Fairy of the Desert; if you like I will help you to escape from this
fatal place, where you may otherwise have to drag on a weary existence
for thirty years or more."

The King of the Gold Mines hardly knew what answer to make to this
proposal. Not because he did not wish very much to escape, but he was
afraid that this might be only another device by which the Fairy of
the Desert was trying to deceive him. As he hesitated the Mermaid, who
guessed his thoughts, said to him:

"You may trust me: I am not trying to entrap you. I am so angry with the
Yellow Dwarf and the Fairy of the Desert that I am not likely to wish to
help them, especially since I constantly see your poor Princess, whose
beauty and goodness make me pity her so much; and I tell you that if you
will have confidence in me I will help you to escape."

"I trust you absolutely," cried the King, "and I will do whatever you
tell me; but if you have seen my Princess I beg of you to tell me how
she is and what is happening to her.

"We must not waste time in talking," said she. "Come with me and I will
carry you to the Castle of Steel, and we will leave upon this shore a
figure so like you that even the Fairy herself will be deceived by it."

So saying, she quickly collected a bundle of sea-weed, and, blowing it
three times, she said:

"My friendly sea-weeds, I order you to stay here stretched upon the sand
until the Fairy of the Desert comes to take you away." And at once
the sea-weeds became like the King, who stood looking at them in great
astonishment, for they were even dressed in a coat like his, but they
lay there pale and still as the King himself might have lain if one
of the great waves had overtaken him and thrown him senseless upon
the shore. And then the Mermaid caught up the King, and away they swam
joyfully together.

"Now," said she, "I have time to tell you about the Princess. In spite
of the blow which the Fairy of the Desert gave her, the Yellow Dwarf
compelled her to mount behind him upon his terrible Spanish cat; but she
soon fainted away with pain and terror, and did not recover till they
were within the walls of his frightful Castle of Steel. Here she was
received by the prettiest girls it was possible to find, who had been
carried there by the Yellow Dwarf, who hastened to wait upon her and
showed her every possible attention. She was laid upon a couch covered
with cloth of gold, embroidered with pearls as big as nuts."

"Ah!" interrupted the King of the Gold Mines, "if Bellissima forgets me,
and consents to marry him, I shall break my heart."

"You need not be afraid of that," answered the Mermaid, "the Princess
thinks of no one but you, and the frightful Dwarf cannot persuade her to
look at him."

"Pray go on with your story," said the King.

"What more is there to tell you?" replied the Mermaid. "Bellissima was
sitting in the wood when you passed, and saw you with the Fairy of the
Desert, who was so cleverly disguised that the Princess took her to be
prettier than herself; you may imagine her despair, for she thought that
you had fallen in love with her."

"She believes that I love her!" cried the King. "What a fatal mistake!
What is to be done to undeceive her?"

"You know best," answered the Mermaid, smiling kindly at him. "When
people are as much in love with one another as you two are, they don't
need advice from anyone else."

As she spoke they reached the Castle of Steel, the side next the sea
being the only one which the Yellow Dwarf had left unprotected by the
dreadful burning walls.

"I know quite well," said the Mermaid, "that the Princess is sitting by
the brook-side, just where you saw her as you passed, but as you will
have many enemies to fight with before you can reach her, take this
sword; armed with it you may dare any danger, and overcome the greatest
difficulties, only beware of one thing--that is, never to let it fall
from your hand. Farewell; now I will wait by that rock, and if you need
my help in carrying off your beloved Princess I will not fail you, for
the Queen, her mother, is my best friend, and it was for her sake that I
went to rescue you."

So saying, she gave to the King a sword made from a single diamond,
which was more brilliant than the sun. He could not find words to
express his gratitude, but he begged her to believe that he fully
appreciated the importance of her gift, and would never forget her help
and kindness.

We must now go back to the Fairy of the Desert. When she found that the
King did not return, she hastened out to look for him, and reached the
shore, with a hundred of the ladies of her train, loaded with splendid
presents for him. Some carried baskets full of diamonds, others golden
cups of wonderful workmanship, and amber, coral, and pearls, others,
again, balanced upon their heads bales of the richest and most beautiful
stuffs, while the rest brought fruit and flowers, and even birds. But
what was the horror of the Fairy, who followed this gay troop, when she
saw, stretched upon the sands, the image of the King which the Mermaid
had made with the sea-weeds. Struck with astonishment and sorrow, she
uttered a terrible cry, and threw herself down beside the pretended
King, weeping, and howling, and calling upon her eleven sisters, who
were also fairies, and who came to her assistance. But they were all
taken in by the image of the King, for, clever as they were, the Mermaid
was still cleverer, and all they could do was to help the Fairy of the
Desert to make a wonderful monument over what they thought was the grave
of the King of the Gold Mines. But while they were collecting jasper
and porphyry, agate and marble, gold and bronze, statues and devices,
to immortalize the King's memory, he was thanking the good Mermaid and
begging her still to help him, which she graciously promised to do as
she disappeared; and then he set out for the Castle of Steel. He walked
fast, looking anxiously round him, and longing once more to see his
darling Bellissima, but he had not gone far before he was surrounded by
four terrible sphinxes who would very soon have torn him to pieces with
their sharp talons if it had not been for the Mermaid's diamond sword.
For, no sooner had he flashed it before their eyes than down they fell
at his feet quite helpless, and he killed them with one blow. But he
had hardly turned to continue his search when he met six dragons covered
with scales that were harder than iron. Frightful as this encounter was
the King's courage was unshaken, and by the aid of his wonderful sword
he cut them in pieces one after the other. Now he hoped his difficulties
were over, but at the next turning he was met by one which he did
not know how to overcome. Four-and-twenty pretty and graceful nymphs
advanced toward him, holding garlands of flowers, with which they barred
the way.

"Where are you going, Prince?" they said; "it is our duty to guard this
place, and if we let you pass great misfortunes will happen to you
and to us. We beg you not to insist upon going on. Do you want to kill
four-and-twenty girls who have never displeased you in any way?"

The King did not know what to do or to say. It went against all his
ideas as a knight to do anything a lady begged him not to do; but, as he
hesitated, a voice in his ear said:

"Strike! strike! and do not spare, or your Princess is lost for ever!"

So, without reply to the nymphs, he rushed forward instantly, breaking
their garlands, and scattering them in all directions; and then went
on without further hindrance to the little wood where he had seen
Bellissima. She was seated by the brook looking pale and weary when he
reached her, and he would have thrown himself down at her feet, but she
drew herself away from him with as much indignation as if he had been
the Yellow Dwarf.

"Ah! Princess," he cried, "do not be angry with me. Let me explain
everything. I am not faithless or to blame for what has happened. I am
a miserable wretch who has displeased you without being able to help
himself."

"Ah!" cried Bellissima, "did I not see you flying through the air with
the loveliest being imaginable? Was that against your will?"

"Indeed it was, Princess," he answered; "the wicked Fairy of the Desert,
not content with chaining me to a rock, carried me off in her chariot to
the other end of the earth, where I should even now be a captive but for
the unexpected help of a friendly mermaid, who brought me here to rescue
you, my Princess, from the unworthy hands that hold you. Do not refuse
the aid of your most faithful lover." So saying, he threw himself at her
feet and held her by her robe. But, alas! in so doing he let fall the
magic sword, and the Yellow Dwarf, who was crouching behind a lettuce,
no sooner saw it than he sprang out and seized it, well knowing its
wonderful power.

The Princess gave a cry of terror on seeing the Dwarf, but this only
irritated the little monster; muttering a few magical words he summoned
two giants, who bound the King with great chains of iron.

"Now," said the Dwarf, "I am master of my rival's fate, but I will give
him his life and permission to depart unharmed if you, Princess, will
consent to marry me."

"Let me die a thousand times rather," cried the unhappy King.

"Alas!" cried the Princess, "must you die? Could anything be more
terrible?"

"That you should marry that little wretch would be far more terrible,"
answered the King.

"At least," continued she, "let us die together."

"Let me have the satisfaction of dying for you, my Princess," said he.

"Oh, no, no!" she cried, turning to the Dwarf; "rather than that I will
do as you wish."

"Cruel Princess!" said the King, "would you make my life horrible to me
by marrying another before my eyes?"

"Not so," replied the Yellow Dwarf; "you are a rival of whom I am too
much afraid; you shall not see our marriage." So saying, in spite of
Bellissima's tears and cries, he stabbed the King to the heart with the
diamond sword.

The poor Princess, seeing her lover lying dead at her feet, could no
longer live without him; she sank down by him and died of a broken
heart.

So ended these unfortunate lovers, whom not even the Mermaid could help,
because all the magic power had been lost with the diamond sword.

As to the wicked Dwarf, he preferred to see the Princess dead rather
than married to the King of the Gold Mines; and the Fairy of the Desert,
when she heard of the King's adventures, pulled down the grand monument
which she had built, and was so angry at the trick that had been played
her that she hated him as much as she had loved him before.

The kind Mermaid, grieved at the sad fate of the lovers, caused them to
be changed into two tall palm trees, which stand always side by side,
whispering together of their faithful love and caressing one another
with their interlacing branches.(1)


(1) Madame d'Aulnoy.




LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD


Once upon a time there lived in a certain village a little country girl,
the prettiest creature was ever seen. Her mother was excessively fond
of her; and her grandmother doted on her still more. This good woman
had made for her a little red riding-hood; which became the girl so
extremely well that everybody called her Little Red Riding-Hood.

One day her mother, having made some custards, said to her:

"Go, my dear, and see how thy grandmamma does, for I hear she has been
very ill; carry her a custard, and this little pot of butter."

Little Red Riding-Hood set out immediately to go to her grandmother, who
lived in another village.

As she was going through the wood, she met with Gaffer Wolf, who had
a very great mind to eat her up, but he dared not, because of some
faggot-makers hard by in the forest. He asked her whither she was going.
The poor child, who did not know that it was dangerous to stay and hear
a wolf talk, said to him:

"I am going to see my grandmamma and carry her a custard and a little
pot of butter from my mamma."

"Does she live far off?" said the Wolf.

"Oh! ay," answered Little Red Riding-Hood; "it is beyond that mill you
see there, at the first house in the village."

"Well," said the Wolf, "and I'll go and see her too. I'll go this way
and you go that, and we shall see who will be there soonest."

The Wolf began to run as fast as he could, taking the nearest way,
and the little girl went by that farthest about, diverting herself in
gathering nuts, running after butterflies, and making nosegays of such
little flowers as she met with. The Wolf was not long before he got to
the old woman's house. He knocked at the door--tap, tap.

"Who's there?"

"Your grandchild, Little Red Riding-Hood," replied the Wolf,
counterfeiting her voice; "who has brought you a custard and a little
pot of butter sent you by mamma."

The good grandmother, who was in bed, because she was somewhat ill,
cried out:

"Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up."

The Wolf pulled the bobbin, and the door opened, and then presently he
fell upon the good woman and ate her up in a moment, for it was above
three days that he had not touched a bit. He then shut the door and went
into the grandmother's bed, expecting Little Red Riding-Hood, who came
some time afterward and knocked at the door--tap, tap.

"Who's there?"

Little Red Riding-Hood, hearing the big voice of the Wolf, was at first
afraid; but believing her grandmother had got a cold and was hoarse,
answered:

"'Tis your grandchild, Little Red Riding-Hood, who has brought you a
custard and a little pot of butter mamma sends you."

The Wolf cried out to her, softening his voice as much as he could:

"Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up."

Little Red Riding-Hood pulled the bobbin, and the door opened.

The Wolf, seeing her come in, said to her, hiding himself under the
bed-clothes:

"Put the custard and the little pot of butter upon the stool, and come
and lie down with me."

Little Red Riding-Hood undressed herself and went into bed, where, being
greatly amazed to see how her grandmother looked in her night-clothes,
she said to her:

"Grandmamma, what great arms you have got!"

"That is the better to hug thee, my dear."

"Grandmamma, what great legs you have got!"

"That is to run the better, my child."

"Grandmamma, what great ears you have got!"

"That is to hear the better, my child."

"Grandmamma, what great eyes you have got!"

"It is to see the better, my child."

"Grandmamma, what great teeth you have got!"

"That is to eat thee up."

And, saying these words, this wicked wolf fell upon Little Red
Riding-Hood, and ate her all up.




THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD


There were formerly a king and a queen, who were so sorry that they had
no children; so sorry that it cannot be expressed. They went to all the
waters in the world; vows, pilgrimages, all ways were tried, and all to
no purpose.

At last, however, the Queen had a daughter. There was a very fine
christening; and the Princess had for her god-mothers all the fairies
they could find in the whole kingdom (they found seven), that every one
of them might give her a gift, as was the custom of fairies in those
days. By this means the Princess had all the perfections imaginable.

After the ceremonies of the christening were over, all the company
returned to the King's palace, where was prepared a great feast for the
fairies. There was placed before every one of them a magnificent cover
with a case of massive gold, wherein were a spoon, knife, and fork, all
of pure gold set with diamonds and rubies. But as they were all sitting
down at table they saw come into the hall a very old fairy, whom they
had not invited, because it was above fifty years since she had been out
of a certain tower, and she was believed to be either dead or enchanted.

The King ordered her a cover, but could not furnish her with a case
of gold as the others, because they had only seven made for the seven
fairies. The old Fairy fancied she was slighted, and muttered some
threats between her teeth. One of the young fairies who sat by her
overheard how she grumbled; and, judging that she might give the little
Princess some unlucky gift, went, as soon as they rose from table, and
hid herself behind the hangings, that she might speak last, and repair,
as much as she could, the evil which the old Fairy might intend.

In the meanwhile all the fairies began to give their gifts to the
Princess. The youngest gave her for gift that she should be the most
beautiful person in the world; the next, that she should have the wit
of an angel; the third, that she should have a wonderful grace in
everything she did; the fourth, that she should dance perfectly well;
the fifth, that she should sing like a nightingale; and the sixth, that
she should play all kinds of music to the utmost perfection.

The old Fairy's turn coming next, with a head shaking more with spite
than age, she said that the Princess should have her hand pierced with a
spindle and die of the wound. This terrible gift made the whole company
tremble, and everybody fell a-crying.

At this very instant the young Fairy came out from behind the hangings,
and spake these words aloud:

"Assure yourselves, O King and Queen, that your daughter shall not die
of this disaster. It is true, I have no power to undo entirely what
my elder has done. The Princess shall indeed pierce her hand with a
spindle; but, instead of dying, she shall only fall into a profound
sleep, which shall last a hundred years, at the expiration of which a
king's son shall come and awake her."

The King, to avoid the misfortune foretold by the old Fairy, caused
immediately proclamation to be made, whereby everybody was forbidden, on
pain of death, to spin with a distaff and spindle, or to have so much as
any spindle in their houses. About fifteen or sixteen years after, the
King and Queen being gone to one of their houses of pleasure, the young
Princess happened one day to divert herself in running up and down the
palace; when going up from one apartment to another, she came into a
little room on the top of the tower, where a good old woman, alone, was
spinning with her spindle. This good woman had never heard of the King's
proclamation against spindles.

"What are you doing there, goody?" said the Princess.

"I am spinning, my pretty child," said the old woman, who did not know
who she was.

"Ha!" said the Princess, "this is very pretty; how do you do it? Give it
to me, that I may see if I can do so."

She had no sooner taken it into her hand than, whether being very hasty
at it, somewhat unhandy, or that the decree of the Fairy had so ordained
it, it ran into her hand, and she fell down in a swoon.

The good old woman, not knowing very well what to do in this affair,
cried out for help. People came in from every quarter in great numbers;
they threw water upon the Princess's face, unlaced her, struck her on
the palms of her hands, and rubbed her temples with Hungary-water; but
nothing would bring her to herself.

And now the King, who came up at the noise, bethought himself of
the prediction of the fairies, and, judging very well that this must
necessarily come to pass, since the fairies had said it, caused the
Princess to be carried into the finest apartment in his palace, and to
be laid upon a bed all embroidered with gold and silver.

One would have taken her for a little angel, she was so very beautiful;
for her swooning away had not diminished one bit of her complexion; her
cheeks were carnation, and her lips were coral; indeed, her eyes were
shut, but she was heard to breathe softly, which satisfied those about
her that she was not dead. The King commanded that they should not
disturb her, but let her sleep quietly till her hour of awaking was
come.

The good Fairy who had saved her life by condemning her to sleep a
hundred years was in the kingdom of Matakin, twelve thousand leagues
off, when this accident befell the Princess; but she was instantly
informed of it by a little dwarf, who had boots of seven leagues, that
is, boots with which he could tread over seven leagues of ground in one
stride. The Fairy came away immediately, and she arrived, about an hour
after, in a fiery chariot drawn by dragons.

The King handed her out of the chariot, and she approved everything
he had done, but as she had very great foresight, she thought when the
Princess should awake she might not know what to do with herself, being
all alone in this old palace; and this was what she did: she
touched with her wand everything in the palace (except the King
and Queen)--governesses, maids of honor, ladies of the bedchamber,
gentlemen, officers, stewards, cooks, undercooks, scullions, guards,
with their beefeaters, pages, footmen; she likewise touched all the
horses which were in the stables, pads as well as others, the great dogs
in the outward court and pretty little Mopsey too, the Princess's little
spaniel, which lay by her on the bed.

Immediately upon her touching them they all fell asleep, that they might
not awake before their mistress and that they might be ready to wait
upon her when she wanted them. The very spits at the fire, as full as
they could hold of partridges and pheasants, did fall asleep also. All
this was done in a moment. Fairies are not long in doing their business.

And now the King and the Queen, having kissed their dear child without
waking her, went out of the palace and put forth a proclamation that
nobody should dare to come near it.

This, however, was not necessary, for in a quarter of an hour's time
there grew up all round about the park such a vast number of trees,
great and small, bushes and brambles, twining one within another, that
neither man nor beast could pass through; so that nothing could be seen
but the very top of the towers of the palace; and that, too, not unless
it was a good way off. Nobody; doubted but the Fairy gave herein a very
extraordinary sample of her art, that the Princess, while she continued
sleeping, might have nothing to fear from any curious people.

When a hundred years were gone and passed the son of the King then
reigning, and who was of another family from that of the sleeping
Princess, being gone a-hunting on that side of the country, asked:

What those towers were which he saw in the middle of a great thick wood?

Everyone answered according as they had heard. Some said:

That it was a ruinous old castle, haunted by spirits.

Others, That all the sorcerers and witches of the country kept there
their sabbath or night's meeting.

The common opinion was: That an ogre lived there, and that he carried
thither all the little children he could catch, that he might eat them
up at his leisure, without anybody being able to follow him, as having
himself only the power to pass through the wood.

The Prince was at a stand, not knowing what to believe, when a very good
countryman spake to him thus:

"May it please your royal highness, it is now about fifty years since I
heard from my father, who heard my grandfather say, that there was then
in this castle a princess, the most beautiful was ever seen; that she
must sleep there a hundred years, and should be waked by a king's son,
for whom she was reserved."

The young Prince was all on fire at these words, believing, without
weighing the matter, that he could put an end to this rare adventure;
and, pushed on by love and honor, resolved that moment to look into it.

Scarce had he advanced toward the wood when all the great trees, the
bushes, and brambles gave way of themselves to let him pass through; he
walked up to the castle which he saw at the end of a large avenue which
he went into; and what a little surprised him was that he saw none of
his people could follow him, because the trees closed again as soon as
he had passed through them. However, he did not cease from continuing
his way; a young and amorous prince is always valiant.

He came into a spacious outward court, where everything he saw might
have frozen the most fearless person with horror. There reigned all over
a most frightful silence; the image of death everywhere showed itself,
and there was nothing to be seen but stretched-out bodies of men and
animals, all seeming to be dead. He, however, very well knew, by the
ruby faces and pimpled noses of the beefeaters, that they were only
asleep; and their goblets, wherein still remained some drops of wine,
showed plainly that they fell asleep in their cups.

He then crossed a court paved with marble, went up the stairs and came
into the guard chamber, where guards were standing in their ranks, with
their muskets upon their shoulders, and snoring as loud as they could.
After that he went through several rooms full of gentlemen and ladies,
all asleep, some standing, others sitting. At last he came into a
chamber all gilded with gold, where he saw upon a bed, the curtains of
which were all open, the finest sight was ever beheld--a princess, who
appeared to be about fifteen or sixteen years of age, and whose bright
and, in a manner, resplendent beauty, had somewhat in it divine. He
approached with trembling and admiration, and fell down before her upon
his knees.

And now, as the enchantment was at an end, the Princess awaked, and
looking on him with eyes more tender than the first view might seem to
admit of:

"Is it you, my Prince?" said she to him. "You have waited a long while."

The Prince, charmed with these words, and much more with the manner in
which they were spoken, knew not how to show his joy and gratitude;
he assured her that he loved her better than he did himself; their
discourse was not well connected, they did weep more than talk--little
eloquence, a great deal of love. He was more at a loss than she, and we
need not wonder at it; she had time to think on what to say to him; for
it is very probable (though history mentions nothing of it) that the
good Fairy, during so long a sleep, had given her very agreeable dreams.
In short, they talked four hours together, and yet they said not half
what they had to say.

In the meanwhile all the palace awaked; everyone thought upon their
particular business, and as all of them were not in love they were ready
to die for hunger. The chief lady of honor, being as sharp set as other
folks, grew very impatient, and told the Princess aloud that supper
was served up. The Prince helped the Princess to rise; she was entirely
dressed, and very magnificently, but his royal highness took care not
to tell her that she was dressed like his great-grandmother, and had
a point band peeping over a high collar; she looked not a bit less
charming and beautiful for all that.

They went into the great hall of looking-glasses, where they supped, and
were served by the Princess's officers, the violins and hautboys played
old tunes, but very excellent, though it was now above a hundred years
since they had played; and after supper, without losing any time, the
lord almoner married them in the chapel of the castle, and the chief
lady of honor drew the curtains. They had but very little sleep--the
Princess had no occasion; and the Prince left her next morning to return
to the city, where his father must needs have been in pain for him. The
Prince told him:

That he lost his way in the forest as he was hunting, and that he had
lain in the cottage of a charcoal-burner, who gave him cheese and brown
bread.

The King, his father, who was a good man, believed him; but his mother
could not be persuaded it was true; and seeing that he went almost every
day a-hunting, and that he always had some excuse ready for so doing,
though he had lain out three or four nights together, she began to
suspect that he was married, for he lived with the Princess above two
whole years, and had by her two children, the eldest of which, who was
a daughter, was named Morning, and the youngest, who was a son, they
called Day, because he was a great deal handsomer and more beautiful
than his sister.

The Queen spoke several times to her son, to inform herself after
what manner he did pass his time, and that in this he ought in duty to
satisfy her. But he never dared to trust her with his secret; he feared
her, though he loved her, for she was of the race of the Ogres, and the
King would never have married her had it not been for her vast riches;
it was even whispered about the Court that she had Ogreish inclinations,
and that, whenever she saw little children passing by, she had all the
difficulty in the world to avoid falling upon them. And so the Prince
would never tell her one word.

But when the King was dead, which happened about two years afterward,
and he saw himself lord and master, he openly declared his marriage; and
he went in great ceremony to conduct his Queen to the palace. They made
a magnificent entry into the capital city, she riding between her two
children.

Soon after the King went to make war with the Emperor Contalabutte, his
neighbor. He left the government of the kingdom to the Queen his mother,
and earnestly recommended to her care his wife and children. He was
obliged to continue his expedition all the summer, and as soon as he
departed the Queen-mother sent her daughter-in-law to a country house
among the woods, that she might with the more ease gratify her horrible
longing.

Some few days afterward she went thither herself, and said to her clerk
of the kitchen:

"I have a mind to eat little Morning for my dinner to-morrow."

"Ah! madam," cried the clerk of the kitchen.

"I will have it so," replied the Queen (and this she spoke in the tone
of an Ogress who had a strong desire to eat fresh meat), "and will eat
her with a sauce Robert."

The poor man, knowing very well that he must not play tricks with
Ogresses, took his great knife and went up into little Morning's
chamber. She was then four years old, and came up to him jumping and
laughing, to take him about the neck, and ask him for some sugar-candy.
Upon which he began to weep, the great knife fell out of his hand, and
he went into the back yard, and killed a little lamb, and dressed it
with such good sauce that his mistress assured him that she had never
eaten anything so good in her life. He had at the same time taken up
little Morning, and carried her to his wife, to conceal her in the
lodging he had at the bottom of the courtyard.

About eight days afterward the wicked Queen said to the clerk of the
kitchen, "I will sup on little Day."

He answered not a word, being resolved to cheat her as he had done
before. He went to find out little Day, and saw him with a little foil
in his hand, with which he was fencing with a great monkey, the child
being then only three years of age. He took him up in his arms and
carried him to his wife, that she might conceal him in her chamber along
with his sister, and in the room of little Day cooked up a young kid,
very tender, which the Ogress found to be wonderfully good.

This was hitherto all mighty well; but one evening this wicked Queen
said to her clerk of the kitchen:

"I will eat the Queen with the same sauce I had with her children."

It was now that the poor clerk of the kitchen despaired of being able
to deceive her. The young Queen was turned of twenty, not reckoning the
hundred years she had been asleep; and how to find in the yard a beast
so firm was what puzzled him. He took then a resolution, that he might
save his own life, to cut the Queen's throat; and going up into her
chamber, with intent to do it at once, he put himself into as great
fury as he could possibly, and came into the young Queen's room with his
dagger in his hand. He would not, however, surprise her, but told
her, with a great deal of respect, the orders he had received from the
Queen-mother.

"Do it; do it" (said she, stretching out her neck). "Execute your
orders, and then I shall go and see my children, my poor children, whom
I so much and so tenderly loved."

For she thought them dead ever since they had been taken away without
her knowledge.

"No, no, madam" (cried the poor clerk of the kitchen, all in tears);
"you shall not die, and yet you shall see your children again; but then
you must go home with me to my lodgings, where I have concealed them,
and I shall deceive the Queen once more, by giving her in your stead a
young hind."

Upon this he forthwith conducted her to his chamber, where, leaving her
to embrace her children, and cry along with them, he went and dressed a
young hind, which the Queen had for her supper, and devoured it with
the same appetite as if it had been the young Queen. Exceedingly was
she delighted with her cruelty, and she had invented a story to tell the
King, at his return, how the mad wolves had eaten up the Queen his wife
and her two children.

One evening, as she was, according to her custom, rambling round about
the courts and yards of the palace to see if she could smell any fresh
meat, she heard, in a ground room, little Day crying, for his mamma was
going to whip him, because he had been naughty; and she heard, at the
same time, little Morning begging pardon for her brother.

The Ogress presently knew the voice of the Queen and her children, and
being quite mad that she had been thus deceived, she commanded next
morning, by break of day (with a most horrible voice, which made
everybody tremble), that they should bring into the middle of the great
court a large tub, which she caused to be filled with toads, vipers,
snakes, and all sorts of serpents, in order to have thrown into it the
Queen and her children, the clerk of the kitchen, his wife and maid;
all whom she had given orders should be brought thither with their hands
tied behind them.

They were brought out accordingly, and the executioners were just going
to throw them into the tub, when the King (who was not so soon expected)
entered the court on horseback (for he came post) and asked, with the
utmost astonishment, what was the meaning of that horrible spectacle.

No one dared to tell him, when the Ogress, all enraged to see what had
happened, threw herself head foremost into the tub, and was instantly
devoured by the ugly creatures she had ordered to be thrown into it for
others. The King could not but be very sorry, for she was his mother;
but he soon comforted himself with his beautiful wife and his pretty
children.




CINDERELLA, OR THE LITTLE GLASS SLIPPER


Once there was a gentleman who married, for his second wife, the
proudest and most haughty woman that was ever seen. She had, by a former
husband, two daughters of her own humor, who were, indeed, exactly like
her in all things. He had likewise, by another wife, a young daughter,
but of unparalleled goodness and sweetness of temper, which she took
from her mother, who was the best creature in the world.

No sooner were the ceremonies of the wedding over but the mother-in-law
began to show herself in her true colors. She could not bear the good
qualities of this pretty girl, and the less because they made her own
daughters appear the more odious. She employed her in the meanest work
of the house: she scoured the dishes, tables, etc., and scrubbed madam's
chamber, and those of misses, her daughters; she lay up in a sorry
garret, upon a wretched straw bed, while her sisters lay in fine rooms,
with floors all inlaid, upon beds of the very newest fashion, and where
they had looking-glasses so large that they might see themselves at
their full length from head to foot.

The poor girl bore all patiently, and dared not tell her father, who
would have rattled her off; for his wife governed him entirely. When she
had done her work, she used to go into the chimney-corner, and sit down
among cinders and ashes, which made her commonly be called Cinderwench;
but the youngest, who was not so rude and uncivil as the eldest, called
her Cinderella. However, Cinderella, notwithstanding her mean apparel,
was a hundred times handsomer than her sisters, though they were always
dressed very richly.

It happened that the King's son gave a ball, and invited all persons of
fashion to it. Our young misses were also invited, for they cut a very
grand figure among the quality. They were mightily delighted at this
invitation, and wonderfully busy in choosing out such gowns, petticoats,
and head-clothes as might become them. This was a new trouble to
Cinderella; for it was she who ironed her sisters' linen, and plaited
their ruffles; they talked all day long of nothing but how they should
be dressed.

"For my part," said the eldest, "I will wear my red velvet suit with
French trimming."

"And I," said the youngest, "shall have my usual petticoat; but then,
to make amends for that, I will put on my gold-flowered manteau, and my
diamond stomacher, which is far from being the most ordinary one in the
world."

They sent for the best tire-woman they could get to make up their
head-dresses and adjust their double pinners, and they had their red
brushes and patches from Mademoiselle de la Poche.

Cinderella was likewise called up to them to be consulted in all these
matters, for she had excellent notions, and advised them always for the
best, nay, and offered her services to dress their heads, which they
were very willing she should do. As she was doing this, they said to
her:

"Cinderella, would you not be glad to go to the ball?"

"Alas!" said she, "you only jeer me; it is not for such as I am to go
thither."

"Thou art in the right of it," replied they; "it would make the people
laugh to see a Cinderwench at a ball."

Anyone but Cinderella would have dressed their heads awry, but she was
very good, and dressed them perfectly well They were almost two days
without eating, so much were they transported with joy. They broke above
a dozen laces in trying to be laced up close, that they might have a
fine slender shape, and they were continually at their looking-glass.
At last the happy day came; they went to Court, and Cinderella followed
them with her eyes as long as she could, and when she had lost sight of
them, she fell a-crying.

Her godmother, who saw her all in tears, asked her what was the matter.

"I wish I could--I wish I could--"; she was not able to speak the rest,
being interrupted by her tears and sobbing.

This godmother of hers, who was a fairy, said to her, "Thou wishest thou
couldst go to the ball; is it not so?"

"Y--es," cried Cinderella, with a great sigh.

"Well," said her godmother, "be but a good girl, and I will contrive
that thou shalt go." Then she took her into her chamber, and said to
her, "Run into the garden, and bring me a pumpkin."

Cinderella went immediately to gather the finest she could get, and
brought it to her godmother, not being able to imagine how this pumpkin
could make her go to the ball. Her godmother scooped out all the inside
of it, having left nothing but the rind; which done, she struck it with
her wand, and the pumpkin was instantly turned into a fine coach, gilded
all over with gold.

She then went to look into her mouse-trap, where she found six mice, all
alive, and ordered Cinderella to lift up a little the trapdoor, when,
giving each mouse, as it went out, a little tap with her wand, the mouse
was that moment turned into a fine horse, which altogether made a very
fine set of six horses of a beautiful mouse-colored dapple-gray. Being
at a loss for a coachman,

"I will go and see," says Cinderella, "if there is never a rat in the
rat-trap--we may make a coachman of him."

"Thou art in the right," replied her godmother; "go and look."

Cinderella brought the trap to her, and in it there were three huge
rats. The fairy made choice of one of the three which had the largest
beard, and, having touched him with her wand, he was turned into a fat,
jolly coachman, who had the smartest whiskers eyes ever beheld. After
that, she said to her:

"Go again into the garden, and you will find six lizards behind the
watering-pot, bring them to me."

She had no sooner done so but her godmother turned them into six
footmen, who skipped up immediately behind the coach, with their
liveries all bedaubed with gold and silver, and clung as close behind
each other as if they had done nothing else their whole lives. The Fairy
then said to Cinderella:

"Well, you see here an equipage fit to go to the ball with; are you not
pleased with it?"

"Oh! yes," cried she; "but must I go thither as I am, in these nasty
rags?"

Her godmother only just touched her with her wand, and, at the same
instant, her clothes were turned into cloth of gold and silver, all
beset with jewels. This done, she gave her a pair of glass slippers, the
prettiest in the whole world. Being thus decked out, she got up into her
coach; but her godmother, above all things, commanded her not to stay
till after midnight, telling her, at the same time, that if she stayed
one moment longer, the coach would be a pumpkin again, her horses mice,
her coachman a rat, her footmen lizards, and her clothes become just as
they were before.

She promised her godmother she would not fail of leaving the ball before
midnight; and then away she drives, scarce able to contain herself for
joy. The King's son who was told that a great princess, whom nobody
knew, was come, ran out to receive her; he gave her his hand as she
alighted out of the coach, and led her into the ball, among all the
company. There was immediately a profound silence, they left off
dancing, and the violins ceased to play, so attentive was everyone to
contemplate the singular beauties of the unknown new-comer. Nothing was
then heard but a confused noise of:

"Ha! how handsome she is! Ha! how handsome she is!"

The King himself, old as he was, could not help watching her, and
telling the Queen softly that it was a long time since he had seen so
beautiful and lovely a creature.

All the ladies were busied in considering her clothes and headdress,
that they might have some made next day after the same pattern, provided
they could meet with such fine material and as able hands to make them.

The King's son conducted her to the most honorable seat, and afterward
took her out to dance with him; she danced so very gracefully that they
all more and more admired her. A fine collation was served up, whereof
the young prince ate not a morsel, so intently was he busied in gazing
on her.

She went and sat down by her sisters, showing them a thousand
civilities, giving them part of the oranges and citrons which the Prince
had presented her with, which very much surprised them, for they did not
know her. While Cinderella was thus amusing her sisters, she heard the
clock strike eleven and three-quarters, whereupon she immediately made a
courtesy to the company and hasted away as fast as she could.

When she got home she ran to seek out her godmother, and, after having
thanked her, she said she could not but heartily wish she might go next
day to the ball, because the King's son had desired her.

As she was eagerly telling her godmother whatever had passed at the
ball, her two sisters knocked at the door, which Cinderella ran and
opened.

"How long you have stayed!" cried she, gaping, rubbing her eyes and
stretching herself as if she had been just waked out of her sleep; she
had not, however, any manner of inclination to sleep since they went
from home.

"If thou hadst been at the ball," said one of her sisters, "thou wouldst
not have been tired with it. There came thither the finest princess, the
most beautiful ever was seen with mortal eyes; she showed us a thousand
civilities, and gave us oranges and citrons."

Cinderella seemed very indifferent in the matter; indeed, she asked them
the name of that princess; but they told her they did not know it, and
that the King's son was very uneasy on her account and would give all
the world to know who she was. At this Cinderella, smiling, replied:

"She must, then, be very beautiful indeed; how happy you have been!
Could not I see her? Ah! dear Miss Charlotte, do lend me your yellow
suit of clothes which you wear every day."

"Ay, to be sure!" cried Miss Charlotte; "lend my clothes to such a dirty
Cinderwench as thou art! I should be a fool."

Cinderella, indeed, expected well such answer, and was very glad of the
refusal; for she would have been sadly put to it if her sister had lent
her what she asked for jestingly.

The next day the two sisters were at the ball, and so was Cinderella,
but dressed more magnificently than before. The King's son was always by
her, and never ceased his compliments and kind speeches to her; to whom
all this was so far from being tiresome that she quite forgot what her
godmother had recommended to her; so that she, at last, counted the
clock striking twelve when she took it to be no more than eleven; she
then rose up and fled, as nimble as a deer. The Prince followed, but
could not overtake her. She left behind one of her glass slippers, which
the Prince took up most carefully. She got home but quite out of breath,
and in her nasty old clothes, having nothing left her of all her finery
but one of the little slippers, fellow to that she dropped. The guards
at the palace gate were asked:

If they had not seen a princess go out.

Who said: They had seen nobody go out but a young girl, very meanly
dressed, and who had more the air of a poor country wench than a
gentlewoman.

When the two sisters returned from the ball Cinderella asked them: If
they had been well diverted, and if the fine lady had been there.

They told her: Yes, but that she hurried away immediately when it struck
twelve, and with so much haste that she dropped one of her little glass
slippers, the prettiest in the world, which the King's son had taken up;
that he had done nothing but look at her all the time at the ball, and
that most certainly he was very much in love with the beautiful person
who owned the glass slipper.

What they said was very true; for a few days after the King's son caused
it to be proclaimed, by sound of trumpet, that he would marry her whose
foot the slipper would just fit. They whom he employed began to try it
upon the princesses, then the duchesses and all the Court, but in vain;
it was brought to the two sisters, who did all they possibly could
to thrust their foot into the slipper, but they could not effect it.
Cinderella, who saw all this, and knew her slipper, said to them,
laughing:

"Let me see if it will not fit me."

Her sisters burst out a-laughing, and began to banter her. The gentleman
who was sent to try the slipper looked earnestly at Cinderella, and,
finding her very handsome, said:

It was but just that she should try, and that he had orders to let
everyone make trial.

He obliged Cinderella to sit down, and, putting the slipper to her foot,
he found it went on very easily, and fitted her as if it had been made
of wax. The astonishment her two sisters were in was excessively great,
but still abundantly greater when Cinderella pulled out of her pocket
the other slipper, and put it on her foot. Thereupon, in came her
godmother, who, having touched with her wand Cinderella's clothes, made
them richer and more magnificent than any of those she had before.

And now her two sisters found her to be that fine, beautiful lady whom
they had seen at the ball. They threw themselves at her feet to beg
pardon for all the ill-treatment they had made her undergo. Cinderella
took them up, and, as she embraced them, cried:

That she forgave them with all her heart, and desired them always to
love her.

She was conducted to the young prince, dressed as she was; he thought
her more charming than ever, and, a few days after, married her.
Cinderella, who was no less good than beautiful, gave her two sisters
lodgings in the palace, and that very same day matched them with two
great lords of the Court.(1)


(1) Charles Perrault.




ALADDIN AND THE WONDERFUL LAMP


There once lived a poor tailor, who had a son called Aladdin, a
careless, idle boy who would do nothing but play ball all day long in
the streets with little idle boys like himself. This so grieved the
father that he died; yet, in spite of his mother's tears and prayers,
Aladdin did not mend his ways. One day, when he was playing in the
streets as usual, a stranger asked him his age, and if he was not the
son of Mustapha the tailor. "I am, sir," replied Aladdin; "but he died
a long while ago." On this the stranger, who was a famous African
magician, fell on his neck and kissed him, saying, "I am your uncle, and
knew you from your likeness to my brother. Go to your mother and tell
her I am coming." Aladdin ran home and told his mother of his newly
found uncle. "Indeed, child," she said, "your father had a brother, but
I always thought he was dead." However, she prepared supper, and bade
Aladdin seek his uncle, who came laden with wine and fruit. He presently
fell down and kissed the place where Mustapha used to sit, bidding
Aladdin's mother not to be surprised at not having seen him before, as
he had been forty years out of the country. He then turned to Aladdin,
and asked him his trade, at which the boy hung his head, while his
mother burst into tears. On learning that Aladdin was idle and would
learn no trade, he offered to take a shop for him and stock it with
merchandise. Next day he bought Aladdin a fine suit of clothes and took
him all over the city, showing him the sights, and brought him home at
nightfall to his mother, who was overjoyed to see her son so fine.

The next day the magician led Aladdin into some beautiful gardens a long
way outside the city gates. They sat down by a fountain and the magician
pulled a cake from his girdle, which he divided between them. They then
journeyed onward till they almost reached the mountains. Aladdin was
so tired that he begged to go back, but the magician beguiled him with
pleasant stories, and led him on in spite of himself. At last they came
to two mountains divided by a narrow valley. "We will go no farther,"
said the false uncle. "I will show you something wonderful; only do you
gather up sticks while I kindle a fire." When it was lit the magician
threw on it a powder he had about him, at the same time saying some
magical words. The earth trembled a little and opened in front of them,
disclosing a square flat stone with a brass ring in the middle to raise
it by. Aladdin tried to run away, but the magician caught him and gave
him a blow that knocked him down. "What have I done, uncle?" he said
piteously; whereupon the magician said more kindly: "Fear nothing, but
obey me. Beneath this stone lies a treasure which is to be yours, and
no one else may touch it, so you must do exactly as I tell you." At the
word treasure Aladdin forgot his fears, and grasped the ring as he was
told, saying the names of his father and grandfather. The stone came up
quite easily, and some steps appeared. "Go down," said the magician; "at
the foot of those steps you will find an open door leading into three
large halls. Tuck up your gown and go through them without touching
anything, or you will die instantly. These halls lead into a garden of
fine fruit trees. Walk on until you come to a niche in a terrace where
stands a lighted lamp. Pour out the oil it contains, and bring it to
me." He drew a ring from his finger and gave it to Aladdin, bidding him
prosper.

Aladdin found everything as the magician had said, gathered some fruit
off the trees, and, having got the lamp, arrived at the mouth of the
cave. The magician cried out in a great hurry: "Make haste and give me
the lamp." This Aladdin refused to do until he was out of the cave. The
magician flew into a terrible passion, and throwing some more powder
on to the fire, he said something, and the stone rolled back into its
place.

The magician left Persia for ever, which plainly showed that he was no
uncle of Aladdin's, but a cunning magician, who had read in his magic
books of a wonderful lamp, which would make him the most powerful man in
the world. Though he alone knew where to find it, he could only receive
it from the hand of another. He had picked out the foolish Aladdin for
this purpose, intending to get the lamp and kill him afterward.

For two days Aladdin remained in the dark, crying and lamenting. At last
he clasped his hands in prayer, and in so doing rubbed the ring, which
the magician had forgotten to take from him. Immediately an enormous and
frightful genie rose out of the earth, saying: "What wouldst thou with
me? I am the Slave of the Ring, and will obey thee in all things."
Aladdin fearlessly replied: "Deliver me from this place!" whereupon the
earth opened, and he found himself outside. As soon as his eyes could
bear the light he went home, but fainted on the threshold. When he came
to himself he told his mother what had passed, and showed her the lamp
and the fruits he had gathered in the garden, which were, in reality,
precious stones. He then asked for some food. "Alas! child," she said,
"I have nothing in the house, but I have spun a little cotton and will
go and sell it." Aladdin bade her keep her cotton, for he would sell the
lamp instead. As it was very dirty she began to rub it, that it might
fetch a higher price. Instantly a hideous genie appeared, and asked what
she would have. She fainted away, but Aladdin, snatching the lamp, said
boldly: "Fetch me something to eat!" The genie returned with a silver
bowl, twelve silver plates containing rich meats, two silver cups, and
two bottles of wine. Aladdin's mother, when she came to herself, said:
"Whence comes this splendid feast?" "Ask not, but eat," replied Aladdin.
So they sat at breakfast till it was dinner-time, and Aladdin told his
mother about the lamp. She begged him to sell it, and have nothing to do
with devils. "No," said Aladdin, "since chance hath made us aware of
its virtues, we will use it, and the ring likewise, which I shall always
wear on my finger." When they had eaten all the genie had brought,
Aladdin sold one of the silver plates, and so on until none were left.
He then had recourse to the genie, who gave him another set of plates,
and thus they lived for many years.

One day Aladdin heard an order from the Sultan proclaimed that everyone
was to stay at home and close his shutters while the Princess, his
daughter, went to and from the bath. Aladdin was seized by a desire to
see her face, which was very difficult, as she always went veiled. He
hid himself behind the door of the bath, and peeped through a chink. The
Princess lifted her veil as she went in, and looked so beautiful that
Aladdin fell in love with her at first sight. He went home so changed
that his mother was frightened. He told her he loved the Princess so
deeply that he could not live without her, and meant to ask her in
marriage of her father. His mother, on hearing this, burst out laughing,
but Aladdin at last prevailed upon her to go before the Sultan and carry
his request. She fetched a napkin and laid in it the magic fruits from
the enchanted garden, which sparkled and shone like the most beautiful
jewels. She took these with her to please the Sultan, and set out,
trusting in the lamp. The Grand Vizier and the lords of council had
just gone in as she entered the hall and placed herself in front of the
Sultan. He, however, took no notice of her. She went every day for a
week, and stood in the same place. When the council broke up on the
sixth day the Sultan said to his Vizier: "I see a certain woman in the
audience-chamber every day carrying something in a napkin. Call her next
time, that I may find out what she wants." Next day, at a sign from the
Vizier, she went up to the foot of the throne and remained kneeling till
the Sultan said to her: "Rise, good woman, and tell me what you want."
She hesitated, so the Sultan sent away all but the Vizier, and bade
her speak frankly, promising to forgive her beforehand for anything she
might say. She then told him of her son's violent love for the Princess.
"I prayed him to forget her," she said, "but in vain; he threatened to
do some desperate deed if I refused to go and ask your Majesty for the
hand of the Princess. Now I pray you to forgive not me alone, but my
son Aladdin." The Sultan asked her kindly what she had in the
napkin, whereupon she unfolded the jewels and presented them. He was
thunderstruck, and turning to the Vizier said: "What sayest thou? Ought
I not to bestow the Princess on one who values her at such a price?" The
Vizier, who wanted her for his own son, begged the Sultan to withhold
her for three months, in the course of which he hoped his son would
contrive to make him a richer present. The Sultan granted this, and told
Aladdin's mother that, though he consented to the marriage, she must not
appear before him again for three months.

Aladdin waited patiently for nearly three months, but after two had
elapsed his mother, going into the city to buy oil, found every one
rejoicing, and asked what was going on. "Do you not know," was the
answer, "that the son of the Grand Vizier is to marry the Sultan's
daughter to-night?" Breathless, she ran and told Aladdin, who was
overwhelmed at first, but presently bethought him of the lamp. He rubbed
it, and the genie appeared, saying, "What is thy will?" Aladdin replied:
"The Sultan, as thou knowest, has broken his promise to me, and the
Vizier's son is to have the Princess. My command is that to-night you
bring hither the bride and bridegroom." "Master, I obey," said the
genie. Aladdin then went to his chamber, where, sure enough, at midnight
the genie transported the bed containing the Vizier's son and the
Princess. "Take this new-married man," he said, "and put him outside in
the cold, and return at daybreak." Whereupon the genie took the Vizier's
son out of bed, leaving Aladdin with the Princess. "Fear nothing,"
Aladdin said to her; "you are my wife, promised to me by your unjust
father, and no harm shall come to you." The Princess was too frightened
to speak, and passed the most miserable night of her life, while Aladdin
lay down beside her and slept soundly. At the appointed hour the
genie fetched in the shivering bridegroom, laid him in his place, and
transported the bed back to the palace.

Presently the Sultan came to wish his daughter good-morning. The unhappy
Vizier's son jumped up and hid himself, while the Princess would not say
a word, and was very sorrowful. The Sultan sent her mother to her, who
said: "How comes it, child, that you will not speak to your father? What
has happened?" The Princess sighed deeply, and at last told her mother
how, during the night, the bed had been carried into some strange house,
and what had passed there. Her mother did not believe her in the least,
but bade her rise and consider it an idle dream.

The following night exactly the same thing happened, and next morning,
on the Princess's refusal to speak, the Sultan threatened to cut off her
head. She then confessed all, bidding him to ask the Vizier's son if it
were not so. The Sultan told the Vizier to ask his son, who owned the
truth, adding that, dearly as he loved the Princess, he had rather die
than go through another such fearful night, and wished to be separated
from her. His wish was granted, and there was an end to feasting and
rejoicing.

When the three months were over, Aladdin sent his mother to remind the
Sultan of his promise. She stood in the same place as before, and the
Sultan, who had forgotten Aladdin, at once remembered him, and sent for
her. On seeing her poverty the Sultan felt less inclined than ever to
keep his word, and asked his Vizier's advice, who counselled him to set
so high a value on the Princess that no man living could come up to
it. The Sultan then turned to Aladdin's mother, saying: "Good woman, a
Sultan must remember his promises, and I will remember mine, but your
son must first send me forty basins of gold brimful of jewels, carried
by forty black slaves, led by as many white ones, splendidly dressed.
Tell him that I await his answer." The mother of Aladdin bowed low and
went home, thinking all was lost. She gave Aladdin the message, adding:
"He may wait long enough for your answer!" "Not so long, mother, as you
think," her son replied. "I would do a great deal more than that for the
Princess." He summoned the genie, and in a few moments the eighty slaves
arrived, and filled up the small house and garden. Aladdin made them
set out to the palace, two and two, followed by his mother. They were
so richly dressed, with such splendid jewels in their girdles, that
everyone crowded to see them and the basins of gold they carried on
their heads. They entered the palace, and, after kneeling before the
Sultan, stood in a half-circle round the throne with their arms crossed,
while Aladdin's mother presented them to the Sultan. He hesitated no
longer, but said: "Good woman, return and tell your son that I wait for
him with open arms." She lost no time in telling Aladdin, bidding him
make haste. But Aladdin first called the genie. "I want a scented bath,"
he said, "a richly embroidered habit, a horse surpassing the Sultan's,
and twenty slaves to attend me. Besides this, six slaves, beautifully
dressed, to wait on my mother; and lastly, ten thousand pieces of gold
in ten purses." No sooner said than done. Aladdin mounted his horse and
passed through the streets, the slaves strewing gold as they went. Those
who had played with him in his childhood knew him not, he had grown so
handsome. When the Sultan saw him he came down from his throne, embraced
him, and led him into a hall where a feast was spread, intending to
marry him to the Princess that very day. But Aladdin refused, saying, "I
must build a palace fit for her," and took his leave. Once home, he said
to the genie: "Build me a palace of the finest marble, set with jasper,
agate, and other precious stones. In the middle you shall build me a
large hall with a dome, its four walls of massy gold and silver, each
having six windows, whose lattices, all except one which is to be left
unfinished, must be set with diamonds and rubies. There must be stables
and horses and grooms and slaves; go and see about it!"

The palace was finished by the next day, and the genie carried him there
and showed him all his orders faithfully carried out, even to the laying
of a velvet carpet from Aladdin's palace to the Sultan's. Aladdin's
mother then dressed herself carefully, and walked to the palace with her
slaves, while he followed her on horseback. The Sultan sent musicians
with trumpets and cymbals to meet them, so that the air resounded with
music and cheers. She was taken to the Princess, who saluted her and
treated her with great honor. At night the Princess said good-by to her
father, and set out on the carpet for Aladdin's palace, with his mother
at her side, and followed by the hundred slaves. She was charmed at the
sight of Aladdin, who ran to receive her. "Princess," he said, "blame
your beauty for my boldness if I have displeased you." She told him
that, having seen him, she willingly obeyed her father in this matter.
After the wedding had taken place Aladdin led her into the hall, where a
feast was spread, and she supped with him, after which they danced till
midnight. Next day Aladdin invited the Sultan to see the palace. On
entering the hall with the four-and-twenty windows, with their rubies,
diamonds, and emeralds, he cried: "It is a world's wonder! There is only
one thing that surprises me. Was it by accident that one window was
left unfinished?" "No, sir, by design," returned Aladdin. "I wished
your Majesty to have the glory of finishing this palace." The Sultan was
pleased, and sent for the best jewelers in the city. He showed them
the unfinished window, and bade them fit it up like the others. "Sir,"
replied their spokesman, "we cannot find jewels enough." The Sultan
had his own fetched, which they soon used, but to no purpose, for in
a month's time the work was not half done. Aladdin, knowing that their
task was vain, bade them undo their work and carry the jewels back, and
the genie finished the window at his command. The Sultan was surprised
to receive his jewels again, and visited Aladdin, who showed him the
window finished. The Sultan embraced him, the envious Vizier meanwhile
hinting that it was the work of enchantment.

Aladdin had won the hearts of the people by his gentle bearing. He was
made captain of the Sultan's armies, and won several battles for him,
but remained modest and courteous as before, and lived thus in peace and
content for several years.

But far away in Africa the magician remembered Aladdin, and by his magic
arts discovered that Aladdin, instead of perishing miserably in the
cave, had escaped, and had married a princess, with whom he was living
in great honor and wealth. He knew that the poor tailor's son could only
have accomplished this by means of the lamp, and traveled night and day
until he reached the capital of China, bent on Aladdin's ruin. As he
passed through the town he heard people talking everywhere about a
marvellous palace. "Forgive my ignorance," he asked, "what is this
palace you speak Of?" "Have you not heard of Prince Aladdin's palace,"
was the reply, "the greatest wonder of the world? I will direct you
if you have a mind to see it." The magician thanked him who spoke, and
having seen the palace, knew that it had been raised by the Genie of the
Lamp, and became half mad with rage. He determined to get hold of the
lamp, and again plunge Aladdin into the deepest poverty.

Unluckily, Aladdin had gone a-hunting for eight days, which gave the
magician plenty of time. He bought a dozen copper lamps, put them into a
basket, and went to the palace, crying: "New lamps for old!" followed
by a jeering crowd. The Princess, sitting in the hall of four-and-twenty
windows, sent a slave to find out what the noise was about, who came
back laughing, so that the Princess scolded her. "Madam," replied the
slave, "who can help laughing to see an old fool offering to exchange
fine new lamps for old ones?" Another slave, hearing this, said: "There
is an old one on the cornice there which he can have." Now this was the
magic lamp, which Aladdin had left there, as he could not take it out
hunting with him. The Princess, not knowing its value, laughingly
bade the slave take it and make the exchange. She went and said to the
magician: "Give me a new lamp for this." He snatched it and bade the
slave take her choice, amid the jeers of the crowd. Little he cared, but
left off crying his lamps, and went out of the city gates to a lonely
place, where he remained till nightfall, when he pulled out the lamp
and rubbed it. The genie appeared, and at the magician's command carried
him, together with the palace and the Princess in it, to a lonely place
in Africa.

Next morning the Sultan looked out of the window toward Aladdin's palace
and rubbed his eyes, for it was gone. He sent for the Vizier and asked
what had become of the palace. The Vizier looked out too, and was lost
in astonishment. He again put it down to enchantment, and this time the
Sultan believed him, and sent thirty men on horseback to fetch Aladdin
in chains. They met him riding home, bound him, and forced him to go
with them on foot. The people, however, who loved him, followed, armed,
to see that he came to no harm. He was carried before the Sultan,
who ordered the executioner to cut off his head. The executioner made
Aladdin kneel down, bandaged his eyes, and raised his scimitar to
strike. At that instant the Vizier, who saw that the crowd had forced
their way into the courtyard and were scaling the walls to rescue
Aladdin, called to the executioner to stay his hand. The people, indeed,
looked so threatening that the Sultan gave way and ordered Aladdin to be
unbound, and pardoned him in the sight of the crowd. Aladdin now
begged to know what he had done. "False wretch!" said the Sultan, "come
thither," and showed him from the window the place where his palace had
stood. Aladdin was so amazed that he could not say a word. "Where is my
palace and my daughter?" demanded the Sultan. "For the first I am not so
deeply concerned, but my daughter I must have, and you must find her
or lose your head." Aladdin begged for forty days in which to find her,
promising, if he failed, to return and suffer death at the Sultan's
pleasure. His prayer was granted, and he went forth sadly from the
Sultan's presence. For three days he wandered about like a madman,
asking everyone what had become of his palace, but they only laughed and
pitied him. He came to the banks of a river, and knelt down to say his
prayers before throwing himself in. In so doing he rubbed the magic ring
he still wore. The genie he had seen in the cave appeared, and asked his
will. "Save my life, genie," said Aladdin, "bring my palace back." "That
is not in my power," said the genie; "I am only the Slave of the Ring;
you must ask him of the lamp." "Even so," said Aladdin, "but thou canst
take me to the palace, and set me down under my dear wife's window." He
at once found himself in Africa, under the window of the Princess, and
fell asleep out of sheer weariness.

He was awakened by the singing of the birds, and his heart was lighter.
He saw plainly that all his misfortunes were owing to the loss of the
lamp, and vainly wondered who had robbed him of it.

That morning the Princess rose earlier than she had done since she had
been carried into Africa by the magician, whose company she was forced
to endure once a day. She, however, treated him so harshly that he dared
not live there altogether. As she was dressing, one of her women looked
out and saw Aladdin. The Princess ran and opened the window, and at the
noise she made Aladdin looked up. She called to him to come to her, and
great was the joy of these lovers at seeing each other again. After he
had kissed her Aladdin said: "I beg of you, Princess, in God's name,
before we speak of anything else, for your own sake and mine, tell me
that has become of an old lamp I left on the cornice in the hall of
four-and-twenty windows, when I went a-hunting." "Alas!" she said, "I am
the innocent cause of our sorrows," and told him of the exchange of the
lamp. "Now I know," cried Aladdin, "that we have to thank the African
magician for this! Where is the lamp?" "He carries it about with him,"
said the Princess. "I know, for he pulled it out of his breast to show
me. He wishes me to break my faith with you and marry him, saying that
you were beheaded by my father's command. He is for ever speaking ill of
you but I only reply by my tears. If I persist, I doubt not but he
will use violence." Aladdin comforted her, and left her for a while.
He changed clothes with the first person he met in the town, and having
bought a certain powder, returned to the Princess, who let him in by
a little side door. "Put on your most beautiful dress," he said to her
"and receive the magician with smiles, leading him to believe that you
have forgotten me. Invite him to sup with you, and say you wish to taste
the wine of his country. He will go for some and while he is gone I will
tell you what to do." She listened carefully to Aladdin and when he left
she arrayed herself gaily for the first time since she left China. She
put on a girdle and head-dress of diamonds, and, seeing in a glass that
she was more beautiful than ever, received the magician, saying, to his
great amazement: "I have made up my mind that Aladdin is dead, and that
all my tears will not bring him back to me, so I am resolved to mourn no
more, and have therefore invited you to sup with me; but I am tired of
the wines of China, and would fain taste those of Africa." The magician
flew to his cellar, and the Princess put the powder Aladdin had given
her in her cup. When he returned she asked him to drink her health in
the wine of Africa, handing him her cup in exchange for his, as a sign
she was reconciled to him. Before drinking the magician made her a
speech in praise of her beauty, but the Princess cut him short, saying:
"Let us drink first, and you shall say what you will afterward." She set
her cup to her lips and kept it there, while the magician drained his to
the dregs and fell back lifeless. The Princess then opened the door to
Aladdin, and flung her arms round his neck; but Aladdin put her away,
bidding her leave him, as he had more to do. He then went to the dead
magician, took the lamp out of his vest, and bade the genie carry the
palace and all in it back to China. This was done, and the Princess in
her chamber only felt two little shocks, and little thought she was at
home again.

The Sultan, who was sitting in his closet, mourning for his lost
daughter, happened to look up, and rubbed his eyes, for there stood the
palace as before! He hastened thither, and Aladdin received him in the
hall of the four-and-twenty windows, with the Princess at his side.
Aladdin told him what had happened, and showed him the dead body of the
magician, that he might believe. A ten days' feast was proclaimed, and
it seemed as if Aladdin might now live the rest of his life in peace;
but it was not to be.

The African magician had a younger brother, who was, if possible, more
wicked and more cunning than himself. He traveled to China to avenge his
brother's death, and went to visit a pious woman called Fatima, thinking
she might be of use to him. He entered her cell and clapped a dagger to
her breast, telling her to rise and do his bidding on pain of death. He
changed clothes with her, colored his face like hers, put on her veil,
and murdered her, that she might tell no tales. Then he went toward the
palace of Aladdin, and all the people, thinking he was the holy woman,
gathered round him, kissing his hands and begging his blessing. When
he got to the palace there was such a noise going on round him that
the Princess bade her slave look out of the window and ask what was the
matter. The slave said it was the holy woman, curing people by her touch
of their ailments, whereupon the Princess, who had long desired to see
Fatima, sent for her. On coming to the Princess the magician offered up
a prayer for her health and prosperity. When he had done the Princess
made him sit by her, and begged him to stay with her always. The false
Fatima, who wished for nothing better, consented, but kept his veil down
for fear of discovery. The Princess showed him the hall, and asked him
what he thought of it. "It is truly beautiful," said the false Fatima.
"In my mind it wants but one thing." "And what is that?" said the
Princess. "If only a roc's egg," replied he, "were hung up from the
middle of this dome, it would be the wonder of the world."

After this the Princess could think of nothing but the roc's egg, and
when Aladdin returned from hunting he found her in a very ill humor. He
begged to know what was amiss, and she told him that all her pleasure in
the hall was spoiled for the want of a roc's egg hanging from the dome.
"If that is all," replied Aladdin, "you shall soon be happy." He left
her and rubbed the lamp, and when the genie appeared commanded him to
bring a roc's egg. The genie gave such a loud and terrible shriek that
the hall shook. "Wretch!" he cried, "is it not enough that I have done
everything for you, but you must command me to bring my master and hang
him up in the midst of this dome? You and your wife and your palace
deserve to be burnt to ashes, but that this request does not come from
you, but from the brother of the African magician, whom you destroyed.
He is now in your palace disguised as the holy woman--whom he murdered.
He it was who put that wish into your wife's head. Take care of
yourself, for he means to kill you." So saying, the genie disappeared.

Aladdin went back to the Princess, saying his head ached, and requesting
that the holy Fatima should be fetched to lay her hands on it. But when
the magician came near, Aladdin, seizing his dagger, pierced him to the
heart. "What have you done?" cried the Princess. "You have killed the
holy woman!" "Not so," replied Aladdin, "but a wicked magician," and
told her of how she had been deceived.

After this Aladdin and his wife lived in peace. He succeeded the Sultan
when he died, and reigned for many years, leaving behind him a long line
of kings.(1)


(1) Arabian Nights.




THE TALE OF A YOUTH WHO SET OUT TO LEARN WHAT FEAR WAS


A father had two sons, of whom the eldest was clever and bright, and
always knew what he was about; but the youngest was stupid, and
couldn't learn or understand anything. So much so that those who saw him
exclaimed: "What a burden he'll be to his father!" Now when there was
anything to be done, the eldest had always to do it; but if something
was required later or in the night-time, and the way led through the
churchyard or some such ghostly place, he always replied: "Oh! no,
father: nothing will induce me to go there, it makes me shudder!" for
he was afraid. Or, when they sat of an evening around the fire telling
stories which made one's flesh creep, the listeners sometimes said:
"Oh! it makes one shudder," the youngest sat in a corner, heard the
exclamation, and could not understand what it meant. "They are always
saying it makes one shudder! it makes one shudder! Nothing makes me
shudder. It's probably an art quite beyond me."

Now it happened that his father said to him one day: "Hearken, you there
in the corner; you are growing big and strong, and you must learn to
earn your own bread. Look at your brother, what pains he takes; but
all the money I've spent on your education is thrown away." "My dear
father," he replied, "I will gladly learn--in fact, if it were possible
I should like to learn to shudder; I don't understand that a bit yet."
The eldest laughed when he heard this, and thought to himself: "Good
heavens! what a ninny my brother is! he'll never come to any good;
as the twig is bent, so is the tree inclined." The father sighed, and
answered him: "You'll soon learn to shudder; but that won't help you to
make a living."

Shortly after this, when the sexton came to pay them a visit, the father
broke out to him, and told him what a bad hand his youngest son was at
everything: he knew nothing and learned nothing. "Only think! when I
asked him how he purposed gaining a livelihood, he actually asked to be
taught to shudder." "If that's all he wants," said the sexton, "I can
teach him that; just you send him to me, I'll soon polish him up." The
father was quite pleased with the proposal, because he thought: "It will
be a good discipline for the youth." And so the sexton took him into his
house, and his duty was to toll the bell. After a few days he woke him
at midnight, and bade him rise and climb into the tower and toll.
"Now, my friend, I'll teach you to shudder," thought he. He stole forth
secretly in front, and when the youth was up above, and had turned
round to grasp the bell-rope, he saw, standing opposite the hole of the
belfry, a white figure. "Who's there?" he called out, but the figure
gave no answer, and neither stirred nor moved. "Answer," cried the
youth, "or begone; you have no business here at this hour of the night."
But the sexton remained motionless, so that the youth might think that
it was a ghost. The youth called out the second time: "What do you want
here? Speak if you are an honest fellow, or I'll knock you down the
stairs." The sexton thought: "He can't mean that in earnest," so gave
forth no sound, and stood as though he were made of stone. Then the
youth shouted out to him the third time, and as that too had no effect,
he made a dash at the spectre and knocked it down the stairs, so that it
fell about ten steps and remained lying in a corner. Thereupon he tolled
the bell, went home to bed without saying a word, and fell asleep. The
sexton's wife waited a long time for her husband, but he never appeared.
At last she became anxious, and woke the youth, and asked: "Don't you
know where my husband is? He went up to the tower in front of you."
"No," answered the youth; "but someone stood on the stairs up there just
opposite the trap-door in the belfry, and because he wouldn't answer me,
or go away, I took him for a rogue and knocked him down. You'd better go
and see if it was he; I should be much distressed if it were." The wife
ran and found her husband who was lying groaning in a corner, with his
leg broken.

She carried him down, and then hurried with loud protestations to the
youth's father. "Your son has been the cause of a pretty misfortune,"
she cried; "he threw my husband downstairs so that he broke his leg.
Take the good-for-nothing wretch out of our house." The father was
horrified, hurried to the youth, and gave him a scolding.

"What unholy pranks are these? The evil one must have put them into your
head." "Father," he replied, "only listen to me; I am quite guiltless.
He stood there in the night, like one who meant harm. I didn't know who
it was, and warned him three times to speak or begone." "Oh!" groaned
the father, "you'll bring me nothing but misfortune; get out of my
sight, I won't have anything more to do with you." "Yes, father,
willingly; only wait till daylight, then I'll set out and learn to
shudder, and in that way I shall be master of an art which will gain me
a living." "Learn what you will," said the father, "it's all one to me.
Here are fifty dollars for you, set forth into the wide world with them;
but see you tell no one where you come from or who your father is, for
I am ashamed of you." "Yes, father, whatever you wish; and if that's all
you ask, I can easily keep it in mind."

When day broke the youth put the fifty dollars into his pocket, set out
on the hard high road, and kept muttering to himself: "If I could only
shudder! if I could only shudder!" Just at this moment a man came by who
heard the youth speaking to himself, and when they had gone on a bit and
were in sight of the gallows the man said to him: "Look! there is the
tree where seven people have been hanged, and are now learning to fly;
sit down under it and wait till nightfall, and then you'll pretty soon
learn to shudder." "If that's all I have to do," answered the youth,
"it's easily done; but if I learn to shudder so quickly, then you shall
have my fifty dollars. Just come back to me to-morrow morning early."
Then the youth went to the gallows-tree and sat down underneath it, and
waited for the evening; and because he felt cold he lit himself a fire.
But at midnight it got so chill that in spite of the fire he couldn't
keep warm. And as the wind blew the corpses one against the other,
tossing them to and fro, he thought to himself: "If you are perishing
down here by the fire, how those poor things up there must be shaking
and shivering!" And because he had a tender heart, he put up a ladder,
which he climbed unhooked one body after the other, and took down all
the seven. Then he stirred the fire, blew it up, and placed them all
round in a circle, that they might warm themselves. But they sat there
and did not move, and the fire caught their clothes. Then he spoke:
"Take care, or I'll hang you up again." But the dead men did not hear
and let their rags go on burning. Then he got angry, and said: "If you
aren't careful yourselves, then I can't help you, and I don't mean to
burn with you"; and he hung them up again in a row. Then he sat down at
his fire and fell asleep. On the following morning the man came to him,
and, wishing to get his fifty dollars, said: "Now you know what it is to
shudder." "No," he answered, "how should I? Those fellows up there never
opened their mouths, and were so stupid that they let those few old
tatters they have on their bodies burn." Then the man saw he wouldn't
get his fifty dollars that day, and went off, saying: "Well, I'm blessed
if I ever met such a person in my life before."

The youth went too on his way, and began to murmur to himself: "Oh! if I
could only shudder! if I could only shudder!" A carrier who was walking
behind him heard these words, and asked him: "Who are you" "I don't
know," said the youth. "Where do you hail from?" "I don't know." "Who's
your father?" "I mayn't say." "What are you constantly muttering to
yourself?" "Oh!" said the youth, "I would give worlds to shudder, but no
one can teach me." "Stuff and nonsense!" spoke the carrier; "come along
with me, and I'll soon put that right." The youth went with the carrier,
and in the evening they reached an inn, where they were to spend the
night. Then, just as he was entering the room, he said again, quite
aloud: "Oh! if I could only shudder! if I could only shudder!" The
landlord, who heard this, laughed and said: "If that's what you're
sighing for, you shall be given every opportunity here." "Oh! hold your
tongue!" said the landlord's wife; "so many people have paid for their
curiosity with their lives, it were a thousand pities if those beautiful
eyes were never again to behold daylight." But the youth said: "No
matter how difficult, I insist on learning it; why, that's what I've set
out to do." He left the landlord no peace till he told him that in the
neighborhood stood a haunted castle, where one could easily learn to
shudder if one only kept watch in it for three nights. The King had
promised the man who dared to do this thing his daughter as wife, and
she was the most beautiful maiden under the sun. There was also much
treasure hid in the castle, guarded by evil spirits, which would then
be free, and was sufficient to make a poor man more than rich. Many had
already gone in, but so far none had ever come out again. So the youth
went to the King and spoke: "If I were allowed, I should much like
to watch for three nights in the castle." The King looked at him, and
because he pleased him, he said: "You can ask for three things, none of
them living, and those you may take with you into the castle." Then he
answered: "Well, I shall beg for a fire, a turning lathe, and a carving
bench with the knife attached."

On the following day the King had everything put into the castle; and
when night drew on the youth took up his position there, lit a bright
fire in one of the rooms, placed the carving bench with the knife close
to it, and sat himself down on the turning lathe. "Oh! if I could only
shudder!" he said: "but I sha'n't learn it here either." Toward midnight
he wanted to make up the fire, and as he was blowing up a blaze he heard
a shriek from a corner. "Ou, miou! how cold we are!" "You fools!" he
cried; "why do you scream? If you are cold, come and sit at the fire and
warm yourselves." And as he spoke two huge black cats sprang fiercely
forward and sat down, one on each side of him, and gazed wildly at him
with their fiery eyes. After a time, when they had warmed themselves,
they said: "Friend, shall we play a little game of cards?" "Why not?" he
replied; "but first let me see your paws." Then they stretched out their
claws. "Ha!" said he; "what long nails you've got! Wait a minute: I must
first cut them off." Thereupon he seized them by the scruff of their
necks, lifted them on to the carving bench, and screwed down their paws
firmly. "After watching you narrowly," said he, "I no longer feel any
desire to play cards with you"; and with these words he struck them dead
and threw them out into the water. But when he had thus sent the two of
them to their final rest, and was again about to sit down at the fire,
out of every nook and corner came forth black cats and black dogs with
fiery chains in such swarms that he couldn't possibly get away from
them. They yelled in the most ghastly manner, jumped upon his fire,
scattered it all, and tried to put it out. He looked on quietly for
a time, but when it got beyond a joke he seized his carving-knife and
called out: "Be off, you rabble rout!" and let fly at them. Some of them
fled away, and the others he struck dead and threw them out into the
pond below. When he returned he blew up the sparks of the fire once
more, and warmed himself. And as he sat thus his eyes refused to keep
open any longer, and a desire to sleep stole over him. Then he looked
around him and beheld in the corner a large bed. "The very thing," he
said, and laid himself down in it. But when he wished to close his
eyes the bed began to move by itself, and ran all round the castle.
"Capital," he said, "only a little quicker." Then the bed sped on as if
drawn by six horses, over thresholds and stairs, up this way and down
that. All of a sudden--crash, crash! with a bound it turned over, upside
down, and lay like a mountain on the top of him. But he tossed the
blankets and pillows in the air, emerged from underneath, and said: "Now
anyone who has the fancy for it may go a drive," lay down at his fire,
and slept till daylight. In the morning the King came, and when he
beheld him lying on the ground he imagined the ghosts had been too much
for him, and that he was dead. Then he said: "What a pity! and such a
fine fellow he was." The youth heard this, got up, and said: "It's not
come to that yet." Then the King was astonished, but very glad, and
asked how it had fared with him. "First-rate," he answered; "and now
I've survived the one night, I shall get through the other two also."
The landlord, when he went to him, opened his eyes wide, and said:
"Well, I never thought to see you alive again. Have you learned now what
shuddering is?" "No," he replied, "it's quite hopeless; if someone could
only tell me how to!"

The second night he went up again to the old castle, sat down at the
fire, and began his old refrain: "If I could only shudder!" As midnight
approached, a noise and din broke out, at first gentle, but gradually
increasing; then all was quiet for a minute, and at length, with a loud
scream, half of a man dropped down the chimney and fell before him. "Hi,
up there!" shouted he; "there's another half wanted down here, that's
not enough"; then the din commenced once more, there was a shrieking
and a yelling, and then the other half fell down. "Wait a bit," he said;
"I'll stir up the fire for you." When he had done this and again looked
around, the two pieces had united, and a horrible-looking man sat on his
seat. "Come," said the youth, "I didn't bargain for that, the seat is
mine." The man tried to shove him away, but the youth wouldn't allow
it for a moment, and, pushing him off by force, sat down in his place
again. Then more men dropped down, one after the other, who fetching
nine skeleton legs and two skulls, put them up and played ninepins with
them. The youth thought he would like to play too, and said: "Look here;
do you mind my joining the game?" "No, not if you have money." "I've
money enough," he replied, "but your balls aren't round enough." Then
he took the skulls, placed them on his lathe, and turned them till they
were round. "Now they'll roll along better," said he, "and houp-la! now
the fun begins." He played with them and lost some of his money, but
when twelve struck everything vanished before his eyes. He lay down and
slept peacefully. The next morning the King came, anxious for news. "How
have you got on this time?" he asked. "I played ninepins," he answered,
"and lost a few pence." "Didn't you shudder then?" "No such luck," said
he; "I made myself merry. Oh! if I only knew what it was to shudder!"

On the third night he sat down again on his bench, and said, in the most
desponding way: "If I could only shudder!" When it got late, six big men
came in carrying a coffin. Then he cried: "Ha! ha! that's most likely
my little cousin who only died a few days ago"; and beckoning with his
finger he called out: "Come, my small cousin, come." They placed the
coffin on the ground, and he approached it and took off the cover. In
it lay a dead man. He felt his face, and it was cold as ice. "Wait," he
said "I'll heat you up a bit," went to the fire, warmed his hand, and
laid it on the man's face, but the dead remained cold. Then he lifted
him out, sat down at the fire, laid him on his knee, and rubbed his arms
that the blood should circulate again. When that too had no effect it
occurred to him that if two people lay together in bed they warmed each
other; so he put him into the bed, covered him up, and lay down beside
him; after a time the corpse became warm and began to move. Then the
youth said: "Now, my little cousin, what would have happened if I
hadn't warmed you?" But the dead man rose up and cried out: "Now I
will strangle you." "What!" said he, "is that all the thanks I get? You
should be put straight back into your coffin," lifted him up, threw him
in, and closed the lid. Then the six men came and carried him out again.
"I simply can't shudder," he said, "and it's clear I sha'n't learn it in
a lifetime here."

Then a man entered, of more than ordinary size and of a very fearful
appearance; but he was old and had a white beard. "Oh! you miserable
creature, now you will soon know what it is to shudder," he cried, "for
you must die." "Not so quickly," answered the youth. "If I am to die,
you must catch me first." "I shall soon lay hold of you," spoke the
monster. "Gently, gently, don't boast too much, I'm as strong as you,
and stronger too." "We'll soon see," said the old man; "if you are
stronger than I then I'll let you off; come, let's have a try." Then he
led him through some dark passages to a forge, and grasping an axe he
drove one of the anvils with a blow into the earth. "I can do better
than that," cried the youth, and went to the other anvil. The old man
drew near him in order to watch closely, and his white beard hung right
down. The youth seized the axe, cleft the anvil open, and jammed in the
old man's beard. "Now I have you," said the youth; "this time it's your
turn to die." Then he seized an iron rod and belabored the old man till
he, whimpering, begged him to leave off, and he would give him great
riches. The youth drew out the axe and let him go. The old man led him
back to the castle and showed him in a cellar three chests of gold. "One
of these," said he, "belongs to the poor, one to the King, and the
third is yours." At that moment twelve struck, and the spirit vanished,
leaving the youth alone in the dark. "I'll surely be able to find a way
out," said he, and groping about he at length found his way back to the
room, and fell asleep at his fire. The next morning the King came, and
said: "Well, now you've surely learned to shudder?" "No," he answered;
"what can it be? My dead cousin was here, and an old bearded man came,
who showed me heaps of money down below there, but what shuddering is no
one has told me." Then the King spoke: "You have freed the castle from
its curse, and you shall marry my daughter." "That's all charming," he
said; "but I still don't know what it is to shudder."

Then the gold was brought up, and the wedding was celebrated, but the
young King, though he loved his wife dearly, and though he was very
happy, still kept on saying: "If I could only shudder! if I could only
shudder!" At last he reduced her to despair. Then her maid said: "I'll
help you; we'll soon make him shudder." So she went out to the stream
that flowed through the garden, and had a pail full of little gudgeons
brought to her. At night, when the young King was asleep, his wife had
to pull the clothes off him, and pour the pail full of little gudgeons
over him, so that the little fish swam all about him. Then he awoke and
cried out: "Oh! how I shudder, how I shudder, dear wife! Yes, now I know
what shuddering is."(1)


(1) Grimm.




RUMPELSTILTZKIN


There was once upon a time a poor miller who had a very beautiful
daughter. Now it happened one day that he had an audience with the King,
and in order to appear a person of some importance he told him that
he had a daughter who could spin straw into gold. "Now that's a talent
worth having," said the King to the miller; "if your daughter is as
clever as you say, bring her to my palace to-morrow, and I'll put her to
the test." When the girl was brought to him he led her into a room full
of straw, gave her a spinning-wheel and spindle, and said: "Now set to
work and spin all night till early dawn, and if by that time you haven't
spun the straw into gold you shall die." Then he closed the door behind
him and left her alone inside.

So the poor miller's daughter sat down, and didn't know what in the
world she was to do. She hadn't the least idea of how to spin straw into
gold, and became at last so miserable that she began to cry.
Suddenly the door opened, and in stepped a tiny little man and said:
"Good-evening, Miss Miller-maid; why are you crying so bitterly?" "Oh!"
answered the girl, "I have to spin straw into gold, and haven't a notion
how it's done." "What will you give me if I spin it for you?" asked
the manikin. "My necklace," replied the girl. The little man took the
necklace, sat himself down at the wheel, and whir, whir, whir, the wheel
went round three times, and the bobbin was full. Then he put on another,
and whir, whir, whir, the wheel went round three times, and the second
too was full; and so it went on till the morning, when all the straw
was spun away, and all the bobbins were full of gold. As soon as the sun
rose the King came, and when he perceived the gold he was astonished and
delighted, but his heart only lusted more than ever after the precious
metal. He had the miller's daughter put into another room full of straw,
much bigger than the first, and bade her, if she valued her life, spin
it all into gold before the following morning. The girl didn't know what
to do, and began to cry; then the door opened as before, and the tiny
little man appeared and said: "What'll you give me if I spin the straw
into gold for you?" "The ring from my finger," answered the girl. The
manikin took the ring, and whir! round went the spinning-wheel again,
and when morning broke he had spun all the straw into glittering gold.
The King was pleased beyond measure at the sights but his greed for gold
was still not satisfied, and he had the miller's daughter brought into a
yet bigger room full of straw, and said: "You must spin all this away
in the night; but if you succeed this time you shall become my wife."
"She's only a miller's daughter, it's true," he thought; "but I couldn't
find a richer wife if I were to search the whole world over." When the
girl was alone the little man appeared for the third time, and said:
"What'll you give me if I spin the straw for you once again?" "I've
nothing more to give," answered the girl. "Then promise me when you
are Queen to give me your first child." "Who knows what may not happen
before that?" thought the miller's daughter; and besides, she saw no
other way out of it, so she promised the manikin what he demanded, and
he set to work once more and spun the straw into gold. When the
King came in the morning, and found everything as he had desired, he
straightway made her his wife, and the miller's daughter became a queen.

When a year had passed a beautiful son was born to her, and she thought
no more of the little man, till all of a sudden one day he stepped into
her room and said: "Now give me what you promised." The Queen was in a
great state, and offered the little man all the riches in her kingdom if
he would only leave her the child. But the manikin said: "No, a living
creature is dearer to me than all the treasures in the world." Then the
Queen began to cry and sob so bitterly that the little man was sorry for
her, and said: "I'll give you three days to guess my name, and if you
find it out in that time you may keep your child."

Then the Queen pondered the whole night over all the names she had ever
heard, and sent a messenger to scour the land, and to pick up far and
near any names he could come across. When the little man arrived on the
following day she began with Kasper, Melchior, Belshazzar, and all the
other names she knew, in a string, but at each one the manikin called
out: "That's not my name." The next day she sent to inquire the names
of all the people in the neighborhood, and had a long list of the
most uncommon and extraordinary for the little man when he made
his appearance. "Is your name, perhaps, Sheepshanks Cruickshanks,
Spindleshanks?" but he always replied: "That's not my name." On the
third day the messenger returned and announced: "I have not been able to
find any new names, but as I came upon a high hill round the corner of
the wood, where the foxes and hares bid each other good-night, I saw
a little house, and in front of the house burned a fire, and round
the fire sprang the most grotesque little man, hopping on one leg and
crying:

  "To-morrow I brew, to-day I bake,
    And then the child away I'll take;
    For little deems my royal dame
    That Rumpelstiltzkin is my name!"


You can imagine the Queen's delight at hearing the name, and when the
little man stepped in shortly afterward and asked: "Now, my lady Queen,
what's my name?" she asked first: "Is your name Conrad?" "No." "Is your
name Harry?" "No." "Is your name perhaps, Rumpelstiltzkin?" "Some demon
has told you that! some demon has told you that!" screamed the little
man, and in his rage drove his right foot so far into the ground that it
sank in up to his waist; then in a passion he seized the left foot with
both hands and tore himself in two.(1)


(1) Grimm.




BEAUTY AND THE BEAST


Once upon a time, in a very far-off country, there lived a merchant who
had been so fortunate in all his undertakings that he was enormously
rich. As he had, however, six sons and six daughters, he found that his
money was not too much to let them all have everything they fancied, as
they were accustomed to do.

But one day a most unexpected misfortune befell them. Their house
caught fire and was speedily burnt to the ground, with all the splendid
furniture, the books, pictures, gold, silver, and precious goods it
contained; and this was only the beginning of their troubles. Their
father, who had until this moment prospered in all ways, suddenly lost
every ship he had upon the sea, either by dint of pirates, shipwreck,
or fire. Then he heard that his clerks in distant countries, whom he
trusted entirely, had proved unfaithful; and at last from great wealth
he fell into the direst poverty.

All that he had left was a little house in a desolate place at least a
hundred leagues from the town in which he had lived, and to this he was
forced to retreat with his children, who were in despair at the idea of
leading such a different life. Indeed, the daughters at first hoped
that their friends, who had been so numerous while they were rich, would
insist on their staying in their houses now they no longer possessed
one. But they soon found that they were left alone, and that their
former friends even attributed their misfortunes to their own
extravagance, and showed no intention of offering them any help. So
nothing was left for them but to take their departure to the cottage,
which stood in the midst of a dark forest, and seemed to be the most
dismal place upon the face of the earth. As they were too poor to have
any servants, the girls had to work hard, like peasants, and the sons,
for their part, cultivated the fields to earn their living. Roughly
clothed, and living in the simplest way, the girls regretted unceasingly
the luxuries and amusements of their former life; only the youngest
tried to be brave and cheerful. She had been as sad as anyone when
misfortune overtook her father, but, soon recovering her natural gaiety,
she set to work to make the best of things, to amuse her father and
brothers as well as she could, and to try to persuade her sisters to
join her in dancing and singing. But they would do nothing of the sort,
and, because she was not as doleful as themselves, they declared that
this miserable life was all she was fit for. But she was really far
prettier and cleverer than they were; indeed, she was so lovely that she
was always called Beauty. After two years, when they were all beginning
to get used to their new life, something happened to disturb their
tranquillity. Their father received the news that one of his ships,
which he had believed to be lost, had come safely into port with a rich
cargo. All the sons and daughters at once thought that their poverty
was at an end, and wanted to set out directly for the town; but their
father, who was more prudent, begged them to wait a little, and, though
it was harvest time, and he could ill be spared, determined to go
himself first, to make inquiries. Only the youngest daughter had any
doubt but that they would soon again be as rich as they were before, or
at least rich enough to live comfortably in some town where they would
find amusement and gay companions once more. So they all loaded their
father with commissions for jewels and dresses which it would have taken
a fortune to buy; only Beauty, feeling sure that it was of no use, did
not ask for anything. Her father, noticing her silence, said: "And what
shall I bring for you, Beauty?"

"The only thing I wish for is to see you come home safely," she
answered.

But this only vexed her sisters, who fancied she was blaming them for
having asked for such costly things. Her father, however, was pleased,
but as he thought that at her age she certainly ought to like pretty
presents, he told her to choose something.

"Well, dear father," she said, "as you insist upon it, I beg that you
will bring me a rose. I have not seen one since we came here, and I love
them so much."

So the merchant set out and reached the town as quickly as possible, but
only to find that his former companions, believing him to be dead, had
divided between them the goods which the ship had brought; and after
six months of trouble and expense he found himself as poor as when he
started, having been able to recover only just enough to pay the cost of
his journey. To make matters worse, he was obliged to leave the town
in the most terrible weather, so that by the time he was within a few
leagues of his home he was almost exhausted with cold and fatigue.
Though he knew it would take some hours to get through the forest, he
was so anxious to be at his journey's end that he resolved to go on;
but night overtook him, and the deep snow and bitter frost made it
impossible for his horse to carry him any further. Not a house was to
be seen; the only shelter he could get was the hollow trunk of a great
tree, and there he crouched all the night which seemed to him the
longest he had ever known. In spite of his weariness the howling of the
wolves kept him awake, and even when at last the day broke he was not
much better off, for the falling snow had covered up every path, and he
did not know which way to turn.

At length he made out some sort of track, and though at the beginning it
was so rough and slippery that he fell down more than once, it presently
became easier, and led him into an avenue of trees which ended in a
splendid castle. It seemed to the merchant very strange that no snow
had fallen in the avenue, which was entirely composed of orange trees,
covered with flowers and fruit. When he reached the first court of the
castle he saw before him a flight of agate steps, and went up them, and
passed through several splendidly furnished rooms. The pleasant warmth
of the air revived him, and he felt very hungry; but there seemed to be
nobody in all this vast and splendid palace whom he could ask to give
him something to eat. Deep silence reigned everywhere, and at last,
tired of roaming through empty rooms and galleries, he stopped in a room
smaller than the rest, where a clear fire was burning and a couch was
drawn up closely to it. Thinking that this must be prepared for someone
who was expected, he sat down to wait till he should come, and very soon
fell into a sweet sleep.

When his extreme hunger wakened him after several hours, he was still
alone; but a little table, upon which was a good dinner, had been drawn
up close to him, and, as he had eaten nothing for twenty-four hours, he
lost no time in beginning his meal, hoping that he might soon have an
opportunity of thanking his considerate entertainer, whoever it might
be. But no one appeared, and even after another long sleep, from which
he awoke completely refreshed, there was no sign of anybody, though a
fresh meal of dainty cakes and fruit was prepared upon the little table
at his elbow. Being naturally timid, the silence began to terrify him,
and he resolved to search once more through all the rooms; but it was of
no use. Not even a servant was to be seen; there was no sign of life in
the palace! He began to wonder what he should do, and to amuse
himself by pretending that all the treasures he saw were his own, and
considering how he would divide them among his children. Then he went
down into the garden, and though it was winter everywhere else, here the
sun shone, and the birds sang, and the flowers bloomed, and the air was
soft and sweet. The merchant, in ecstacies with all he saw and heard,
said to himself:

"All this must be meant for me. I will go this minute and bring my
children to share all these delights."

In spite of being so cold and weary when he reached the castle, he had
taken his horse to the stable and fed it. Now he thought he would saddle
it for his homeward journey, and he turned down the path which led to
the stable. This path had a hedge of roses on each side of it, and the
merchant thought he had never seen or smelt such exquisite flowers.
They reminded him of his promise to Beauty, and he stopped and had just
gathered one to take to her when he was startled by a strange noise
behind him. Turning round, he saw a frightful Beast, which seemed to be
very angry and said, in a terrible voice:

"Who told you that you might gather my roses? Was it not enough that I
allowed you to be in my palace and was kind to you? This is the way you
show your gratitude, by stealing my flowers! But your insolence shall
not go unpunished." The merchant, terrified by these furious words,
dropped the fatal rose, and, throwing himself on his knees, cried:
"Pardon me, noble sir. I am truly grateful to you for your hospitality,
which was so magnificent that I could not imagine that you would be
offended by my taking such a little thing as a rose." But the Beast's
anger was not lessened by this speech.

"You are very ready with excuses and flattery," he cried; "but that will
not save you from the death you deserve."

"Alas!" thought the merchant, "if my daughter could only know what
danger her rose has brought me into!"

And in despair he began to tell the Beast all his misfortunes, and the
reason of his journey, not forgetting to mention Beauty's request.

"A king's ransom would hardly have procured all that my other daughters
asked." he said: "but I thought that I might at least take Beauty her
rose. I beg you to forgive me, for you see I meant no harm."

The Beast considered for a moment, and then he said, in a less furious
tone:

"I will forgive you on one condition--that is, that you will give me one
of your daughters."

"Ah!" cried the merchant, "if I were cruel enough to buy my own life at
the expense of one of my children's, what excuse could I invent to bring
her here?"

"No excuse would be necessary," answered the Beast. "If she comes at all
she must come willingly. On no other condition will I have her. See if
any one of them is courageous enough, and loves you well enough to come
and save your life. You seem to be an honest man, so I will trust you to
go home. I give you a month to see if either of your daughters will come
back with you and stay here, to let you go free. If neither of them is
willing, you must come alone, after bidding them good-by for ever, for
then you will belong to me. And do not imagine that you can hide from
me, for if you fail to keep your word I will come and fetch you!" added
the Beast grimly.

The merchant accepted this proposal, though he did not really think any
of his daughters could be persuaded to come. He promised to return at
the time appointed, and then, anxious to escape from the presence of the
Beast, he asked permission to set off at once. But the Beast answered
that he could not go until next day.

"Then you will find a horse ready for you," he said. "Now go and eat
your supper, and await my orders."

The poor merchant, more dead than alive, went back to his room, where
the most delicious supper was already served on the little table which
was drawn up before a blazing fire. But he was too terrified to eat, and
only tasted a few of the dishes, for fear the Beast should be angry if
he did not obey his orders. When he had finished he heard a great noise
in the next room, which he knew meant that the Beast was coming. As he
could do nothing to escape his visit, the only thing that remained was
to seem as little afraid as possible; so when the Beast appeared and
asked roughly if he had supped well, the merchant answered humbly that
he had, thanks to his host's kindness. Then the Beast warned him to
remember their agreement, and to prepare his daughter exactly for what
she had to expect.

"Do not get up to-morrow," he added, "until you see the sun and hear
a golden bell ring. Then you will find your breakfast waiting for you
here, and the horse you are to ride will be ready in the courtyard. He
will also bring you back again when you come with your daughter a month
hence. Farewell. Take a rose to Beauty, and remember your promise!"

The merchant was only too glad when the Beast went away, and though he
could not sleep for sadness, he lay down until the sun rose. Then, after
a hasty breakfast, he went to gather Beauty's rose, and mounted his
horse, which carried him off so swiftly that in an instant he had lost
sight of the palace, and he was still wrapped in gloomy thoughts when it
stopped before the door of the cottage.

His sons and daughters, who had been very uneasy at his long absence,
rushed to meet him, eager to know the result of his journey, which,
seeing him mounted upon a splendid horse and wrapped in a rich mantle,
they supposed to be favorable. He hid the truth from them at first, only
saying sadly to Beauty as he gave her the rose:

"Here is what you asked me to bring you; you little know what it has
cost."

But this excited their curiosity so greatly that presently he told
them his adventures from beginning to end, and then they were all very
unhappy. The girls lamented loudly over their lost hopes, and the sons
declared that their father should not return to this terrible castle,
and began to make plans for killing the Beast if it should come to fetch
him. But he reminded them that he had promised to go back. Then the
girls were very angry with Beauty, and said it was all her fault, and
that if she had asked for something sensible this would never have
happened, and complained bitterly that they should have to suffer for
her folly.

Poor Beauty, much distressed, said to them:

"I have, indeed, caused this misfortune, but I assure you I did it
innocently. Who could have guessed that to ask for a rose in the middle
of summer would cause so much misery? But as I did the mischief it is
only just that I should suffer for it. I will therefore go back with my
father to keep his promise."

At first nobody would hear of this arrangement, and her father and
brothers, who loved her dearly, declared that nothing should make them
let her go; but Beauty was firm. As the time drew near she divided
all her little possessions between her sisters, and said good-by to
everything she loved, and when the fatal day came she encouraged and
cheered her father as they mounted together the horse which had brought
him back. It seemed to fly rather than gallop, but so smoothly that
Beauty was not frightened; indeed, she would have enjoyed the journey if
she had not feared what might happen to her at the end of it. Her father
still tried to persuade her to go back, but in vain. While they were
talking the night fell, and then, to their great surprise, wonderful
colored lights began to shine in all directions, and splendid fireworks
blazed out before them; all the forest was illuminated by them, and
even felt pleasantly warm, though it had been bitterly cold before. This
lasted until they reached the avenue of orange trees, where were statues
holding flaming torches, and when they got nearer to the palace they saw
that it was illuminated from the roof to the ground, and music sounded
softly from the courtyard. "The Beast must be very hungry," said Beauty,
trying to laugh, "if he makes all this rejoicing over the arrival of his
prey."

But, in spite of her anxiety, she could not help admiring all the
wonderful things she saw.

The horse stopped at the foot of the flight of steps leading to the
terrace, and when they had dismounted her father led her to the little
room he had been in before, where they found a splendid fire burning,
and the table daintily spread with a delicious supper.

The merchant knew that this was meant for them, and Beauty, who was
rather less frightened now that she had passed through so many rooms and
seen nothing of the Beast, was quite willing to begin, for her long ride
had made her very hungry. But they had hardly finished their meal when
the noise of the Beast's footsteps was heard approaching, and Beauty
clung to her father in terror, which became all the greater when she saw
how frightened he was. But when the Beast really appeared, though
she trembled at the sight of him, she made a great effort to hide her
terror, and saluted him respectfully.

This evidently pleased the Beast. After looking at her he said, in a
tone that might have struck terror into the boldest heart, though he did
not seem to be angry:

"Good-evening, old man. Good-evening, Beauty."

The merchant was too terrified to reply, but Beauty answered sweetly:
"Good-evening, Beast."

"Have you come willingly?" asked the Beast. "Will you be content to stay
here when your father goes away?"

Beauty answered bravely that she was quite prepared to stay.

"I am pleased with you," said the Beast. "As you have come of your own
accord, you may stay. As for you, old man," he added, turning to the
merchant, "at sunrise to-morrow you will take your departure. When the
bell rings get up quickly and eat your breakfast, and you will find the
same horse waiting to take you home; but remember that you must never
expect to see my palace again."

Then turning to Beauty, he said:

"Take your father into the next room, and help him to choose everything
you think your brothers and sisters would like to have. You will find
two traveling-trunks there; fill them as full as you can. It is only
just that you should send them something very precious as a remembrance
of yourself."

Then he went away, after saying, "Good-by, Beauty; good-by, old man";
and though Beauty was beginning to think with great dismay of her
father's departure, she was afraid to disobey the Beast's orders; and
they went into the next room, which had shelves and cupboards all round
it. They were greatly surprised at the riches it contained. There were
splendid dresses fit for a queen, with all the ornaments that were to
be worn with them; and when Beauty opened the cupboards she was quite
dazzled by the gorgeous jewels that lay in heaps upon every shelf. After
choosing a vast quantity, which she divided between her sisters--for she
had made a heap of the wonderful dresses for each of them--she opened
the last chest, which was full of gold.

"I think, father," she said, "that, as the gold will be more useful to
you, we had better take out the other things again, and fill the trunks
with it." So they did this; but the more they put in the more room there
seemed to be, and at last they put back all the jewels and dresses they
had taken out, and Beauty even added as many more of the jewels as she
could carry at once; and then the trunks were not too full, but they
were so heavy that an elephant could not have carried them!

"The Beast was mocking us," cried the merchant; "he must have pretended
to give us all these things, knowing that I could not carry them away."

"Let us wait and see," answered Beauty. "I cannot believe that he meant
to deceive us. All we can do is to fasten them up and leave them ready."

So they did this and returned to the little room, where, to their
astonishment, they found breakfast ready. The merchant ate his with a
good appetite, as the Beast's generosity made him believe that he might
perhaps venture to come back soon and see Beauty. But she felt sure that
her father was leaving her for ever, so she was very sad when the bell
rang sharply for the second time, and warned them that the time had come
for them to part. They went down into the courtyard, where two horses
were waiting, one loaded with the two trunks, the other for him to
ride. They were pawing the ground in their impatience to start, and the
merchant was forced to bid Beauty a hasty farewell; and as soon as he
was mounted he went off at such a pace that she lost sight of him in an
instant. Then Beauty began to cry, and wandered sadly back to her
own room. But she soon found that she was very sleepy, and as she had
nothing better to do she lay down and instantly fell asleep. And then
she dreamed that she was walking by a brook bordered with trees, and
lamenting her sad fate, when a young prince, handsomer than anyone she
had ever seen, and with a voice that went straight to her heart, came
and said to her, "Ah, Beauty! you are not so unfortunate as you suppose.
Here you will be rewarded for all you have suffered elsewhere. Your
every wish shall be gratified. Only try to find me out, no matter how I
may be disguised, as I love you dearly, and in making me happy you will
find your own happiness. Be as true-hearted as you are beautiful, and we
shall have nothing left to wish for."

"What can I do, Prince, to make you happy?" said Beauty.

"Only be grateful," he answered, "and do not trust too much to your
eyes. And, above all, do not desert me until you have saved me from my
cruel misery."

After this she thought she found herself in a room with a stately and
beautiful lady, who said to her:

"Dear Beauty, try not to regret all you have left behind you, for you
are destined to a better fate. Only do not let yourself be deceived by
appearances."

Beauty found her dreams so interesting that she was in no hurry to
awake, but presently the clock roused her by calling her name softly
twelve times, and then she got up and found her dressing-table set
out with everything she could possibly want; and when her toilet was
finished she found dinner was waiting in the room next to hers. But
dinner does not take very long when you are all by yourself, and very
soon she sat down cosily in the corner of a sofa, and began to think
about the charming Prince she had seen in her dream.

"He said I could make him happy," said Beauty to herself.

"It seems, then, that this horrible Beast keeps him a prisoner. How
can I set him free? I wonder why they both told me not to trust to
appearances? I don't understand it. But, after all, it was only a
dream, so why should I trouble myself about it? I had better go and find
something to do to amuse myself."

So she got up and began to explore some of the many rooms of the palace.

The first she entered was lined with mirrors, and Beauty saw herself
reflected on every side, and thought she had never seen such a charming
room. Then a bracelet which was hanging from a chandelier caught her
eye, and on taking it down she was greatly surprised to find that it
held a portrait of her unknown admirer, just as she had seen him in her
dream. With great delight she slipped the bracelet on her arm, and went
on into a gallery of pictures, where she soon found a portrait of the
same handsome Prince, as large as life, and so well painted that as she
studied it he seemed to smile kindly at her. Tearing herself away from
the portrait at last, she passed through into a room which contained
every musical instrument under the sun, and here she amused herself for
a long while in trying some of them, and singing until she was tired.
The next room was a library, and she saw everything she had ever wanted
to read, as well as everything she had read, and it seemed to her that a
whole lifetime would not be enough to even read the names of the books,
there were so many. By this time it was growing dusk, and wax candles
in diamond and ruby candlesticks were beginning to light themselves in
every room.

Beauty found her supper served just at the time she preferred to have
it, but she did not see anyone or hear a sound, and, though her father
had warned her that she would be alone, she began to find it rather
dull.

But presently she heard the Beast coming, and wondered tremblingly if he
meant to eat her up now.

However, as he did not seem at all ferocious, and only said gruffly:

"Good-evening, Beauty," she answered cheerfully and managed to conceal
her terror. Then the Beast asked her how she had been amusing herself,
and she told him all the rooms she had seen.

Then he asked if she thought she could be happy in his palace; and
Beauty answered that everything was so beautiful that she would be very
hard to please if she could not be happy. And after about an hour's talk
Beauty began to think that the Beast was not nearly so terrible as she
had supposed at first. Then he got up to leave her, and said in his
gruff voice:

"Do you love me, Beauty? Will you marry me?"

"Oh! what shall I say?" cried Beauty, for she was afraid to make the
Beast angry by refusing.

"Say 'yes' or 'no' without fear," he replied.

"Oh! no, Beast," said Beauty hastily.

"Since you will not, good-night, Beauty," he said.

And she answered, "Good-night, Beast," very glad to find that her
refusal had not provoked him. And after he was gone she was very soon in
bed and asleep, and dreaming of her unknown Prince. She thought he came
and said to her:

"Ah, Beauty! why are you so unkind to me? I fear I am fated to be
unhappy for many a long day still."

And then her dreams changed, but the charming Prince figured in
them all; and when morning came her first thought was to look at the
portrait, and see if it was really like him, and she found that it
certainly was.

This morning she decided to amuse herself in the garden, for the sun
shone, and all the fountains were playing; but she was astonished to
find that every place was familiar to her, and presently she came to the
brook where the myrtle trees were growing where she had first met the
Prince in her dream, and that made her think more than ever that he must
be kept a prisoner by the Beast. When she was tired she went back to
the palace, and found a new room full of materials for every kind of
work--ribbons to make into bows, and silks to work into flowers. Then
there was an aviary full of rare birds, which were so tame that they
flew to Beauty as soon as they saw her, and perched upon her shoulders
and her head.

"Pretty little creatures," she said, "how I wish that your cage was
nearer to my room, that I might often hear you sing!"

So saying she opened a door, and found, to her delight, that it led into
her own room, though she had thought it was quite the other side of the
palace.

There were more birds in a room farther on, parrots and cockatoos that
could talk, and they greeted Beauty by name; indeed, she found them so
entertaining that she took one or two back to her room, and they talked
to her while she was at supper; after which the Beast paid her his usual
visit, and asked her the same questions as before, and then with a gruff
"good-night" he took his departure, and Beauty went to bed to dream of
her mysterious Prince. The days passed swiftly in different amusements,
and after a while Beauty found out another strange thing in the palace,
which often pleased her when she was tired of being alone. There was one
room which she had not noticed particularly; it was empty, except that
under each of the windows stood a very comfortable chair; and the first
time she had looked out of the window it had seemed to her that a black
curtain prevented her from seeing anything outside. But the second time
she went into the room, happening to be tired, she sat down in one of
the chairs, when instantly the curtain was rolled aside, and a most
amusing pantomime was acted before her; there were dances, and colored
lights, and music, and pretty dresses, and it was all so gay that Beauty
was in ecstacies. After that she tried the other seven windows in turn,
and there was some new and surprising entertainment to be seen from each
of them, so that Beauty never could feel lonely any more. Every evening
after supper the Beast came to see her, and always before saying
good-night asked her in his terrible voice:

"Beauty, will you marry me?"

And it seemed to Beauty, now she understood him better, that when she
said, "No, Beast," he went away quite sad. But her happy dreams of the
handsome young Prince soon made her forget the poor Beast, and the only
thing that at all disturbed her was to be constantly told to distrust
appearances, to let her heart guide her, and not her eyes, and many
other equally perplexing things, which, consider as she would, she could
not understand.

So everything went on for a long time, until at last, happy as she was,
Beauty began to long for the sight of her father and her brothers and
sisters; and one night, seeing her look very sad, the Beast asked her
what was the matter. Beauty had quite ceased to be afraid of him. Now
she knew that he was really gentle in spite of his ferocious looks and
his dreadful voice. So she answered that she was longing to see her
home once more. Upon hearing this the Beast seemed sadly distressed, and
cried miserably.

"Ah! Beauty, have you the heart to desert an unhappy Beast like this?
What more do you want to make you happy? Is it because you hate me that
you want to escape?"

"No, dear Beast," answered Beauty softly, "I do not hate you, and I
should be very sorry never to see you any more, but I long to see my
father again. Only let me go for two months, and I promise to come back
to you and stay for the rest of my life."

The Beast, who had been sighing dolefully while she spoke, now replied:

"I cannot refuse you anything you ask, even though it should cost me my
life. Take the four boxes you will find in the room next to your own,
and fill them with everything you wish to take with you. But remember
your promise and come back when the two months are over, or you may have
cause to repent it, for if you do not come in good time you will find
your faithful Beast dead. You will not need any chariot to bring you
back. Only say good-by to all your brothers and sisters the night before
you come away, and when you have gone to bed turn this ring round upon
your finger and say firmly: 'I wish to go back to my palace and see my
Beast again.' Good-night, Beauty. Fear nothing, sleep peacefully, and
before long you shall see your father once more."

As soon as Beauty was alone she hastened to fill the boxes with all the
rare and precious things she saw about her, and only when she was tired
of heaping things into them did they seem to be full.

Then she went to bed, but could hardly sleep for joy. And when at last
she did begin to dream of her beloved Prince she was grieved to see him
stretched upon a grassy bank, sad and weary, and hardly like himself.

"What is the matter?" she cried.

He looked at her reproachfully, and said:

"How can you ask me, cruel one? Are you not leaving me to my death
perhaps?"

"Ah! don't be so sorrowful," cried Beauty; "I am only going to assure
my father that I am safe and happy. I have promised the Beast faithfully
that I will come back, and he would die of grief if I did not keep my
word!"

"What would that matter to you?" said the Prince "Surely you would not
care?"

"Indeed, I should be ungrateful if I did not care for such a kind
Beast," cried Beauty indignantly. "I would die to save him from pain. I
assure you it is not his fault that he is so ugly."

Just then a strange sound woke her--someone was speaking not very far
away; and opening her eyes she found herself in a room she had never
seen before, which was certainly not nearly so splendid as those she
was used to in the Beast's palace. Where could she be? She got up and
dressed hastily, and then saw that the boxes she had packed the night
before were all in the room. While she was wondering by what magic
the Beast had transported them and herself to this strange place she
suddenly heard her father's voice, and rushed out and greeted
him joyfully. Her brothers and sisters were all astonished at her
appearance, as they had never expected to see her again, and there was
no end to the questions they asked her. She had also much to hear
about what had happened to them while she was away, and of her father's
journey home. But when they heard that she had only come to be with them
for a short time, and then must go back to the Beast's palace for ever,
they lamented loudly. Then Beauty asked her father what he thought could
be the meaning of her strange dreams, and why the Prince constantly
begged her not to trust to appearances. After much consideration, he
answered: "You tell me yourself that the Beast, frightful as he
is, loves you dearly, and deserves your love and gratitude for his
gentleness and kindness; I think the Prince must mean you to understand
that you ought to reward him by doing as he wishes you to, in spite of
his ugliness."

Beauty could not help seeing that this seemed very probable; still, when
she thought of her dear Prince who was so handsome, she did not feel at
all inclined to marry the Beast. At any rate, for two months she need
not decide, but could enjoy herself with her sisters. But though they
were rich now, and lived in town again, and had plenty of acquaintances,
Beauty found that nothing amused her very much; and she often thought of
the palace, where she was so happy, especially as at home she never once
dreamed of her dear Prince, and she felt quite sad without him.

Then her sisters seemed to have got quite used to being without her, and
even found her rather in the way, so she would not have been sorry when
the two months were over but for her father and brothers, who begged her
to stay, and seemed so grieved at the thought of her departure that she
had not the courage to say good-by to them. Every day when she got up
she meant to say it at night, and when night came she put it off again,
until at last she had a dismal dream which helped her to make up her
mind. She thought she was wandering in a lonely path in the palace
gardens, when she heard groans which seemed to come from some bushes
hiding the entrance of a cave, and running quickly to see what could be
the matter, she found the Beast stretched out upon his side, apparently
dying. He reproached her faintly with being the cause of his distress,
and at the same moment a stately lady appeared, and said very gravely:

"Ah! Beauty, you are only just in time to save his life. See what
happens when people do not keep their promises! If you had delayed one
day more, you would have found him dead."

Beauty was so terrified by this dream that the next morning she
announced her intention of going back at once, and that very night she
said good-by to her father and all her brothers and sisters, and as soon
as she was in bed she turned her ring round upon her finger, and said
firmly, "I wish to go back to my palace and see my Beast again," as she
had been told to do.

Then she fell asleep instantly, and only woke up to hear the clock
saying "Beauty, Beauty" twelve times in its musical voice, which told
her at once that she was really in the palace once more. Everything
was just as before, and her birds were so glad to see her! But Beauty
thought she had never known such a long day, for she was so anxious to
see the Beast again that she felt as if suppertime would never come.

But when it did come and no Beast appeared she was really frightened;
so, after listening and waiting for a long time, she ran down into the
garden to search for him. Up and down the paths and avenues ran poor
Beauty, calling him in vain, for no one answered, and not a trace of him
could she find; until at last, quite tired, she stopped for a minute's
rest, and saw that she was standing opposite the shady path she had seen
in her dream. She rushed down it, and, sure enough, there was the cave,
and in it lay the Beast--asleep, as Beauty thought. Quite glad to have
found him, she ran up and stroked his head, but, to her horror, he did
not move or open his eyes.

"Oh! he is dead; and it is all my fault," said Beauty, crying bitterly.

But then, looking at him again, she fancied he still breathed, and,
hastily fetching some water from the nearest fountain, she sprinkled it
over his face, and, to her great delight, he began to revive.

"Oh! Beast, how you frightened me!" she cried. "I never knew how much
I loved you until just now, when I feared I was too late to save your
life."

"Can you really love such an ugly creature as I am?" said the Beast
faintly. "Ah! Beauty, you only came just in time. I was dying because
I thought you had forgotten your promise. But go back now and rest, I
shall see you again by and by."

Beauty, who had half expected that he would be angry with her, was
reassured by his gentle voice, and went back to the palace, where supper
was awaiting her; and afterward the Beast came in as usual, and talked
about the time she had spent with her father, asking if she had enjoyed
herself, and if they had all been very glad to see her.

Beauty answered politely, and quite enjoyed telling him all that had
happened to her. And when at last the time came for him to go, and he
asked, as he had so often asked before, "Beauty, will you marry me?"

She answered softly, "Yes, dear Beast."

As she spoke a blaze of light sprang up before the windows of the
palace; fireworks crackled and guns banged, and across the avenue of
orange trees, in letters all made of fire-flies, was written: "Long live
the Prince and his Bride."

Turning to ask the Beast what it could all mean, Beauty found that he
had disappeared, and in his place stood her long-loved Prince! At the
same moment the wheels of a chariot were heard upon the terrace, and two
ladies entered the room. One of them Beauty recognized as the stately
lady she had seen in her dreams; the other was also so grand and queenly
that Beauty hardly knew which to greet first.

But the one she already knew said to her companion:

"Well, Queen, this is Beauty, who has had the courage to rescue your
son from the terrible enchantment. They love one another, and only your
consent to their marriage is wanting to make them perfectly happy."

"I consent with all my heart," cried the Queen. "How can I ever thank
you enough, charming girl, for having restored my dear son to his
natural form?"

And then she tenderly embraced Beauty and the Prince, who had meanwhile
been greeting the Fairy and receiving her congratulations.

"Now," said the Fairy to Beauty, "I suppose you would like me to send
for all your brothers and sisters to dance at your wedding?"

And so she did, and the marriage was celebrated the very next day
with the utmost splendor, and Beauty and the Prince lived happily ever
after.(1)


(1) La Belle et la Bete. Par Madame de Villeneuve.




THE MASTER-MAID


Once upon a time there was a king who had many sons. I do not exactly
know how many there were, but the youngest of them could not stay
quietly at home, and was determined to go out into the world and try his
luck, and after a long time the King was forced to give him leave to go.
When he had traveled about for several days, he came to a giant's house,
and hired himself to the giant as a servant. In the morning the giant
had to go out to pasture his goats, and as he was leaving the house he
told the King's son that he must clean out the stable. "And after you
have done that," he said, "you need not do any more work to-day, for you
have come to a kind master, and that you shall find. But what I set you
to do must be done both well and thoroughly, and you must on no account
go into any of the rooms which lead out of the room in which you slept
last night. If you do, I will take your life."

"Well to be sure, he is an easy master!" said the Prince to himself as
he walked up and down the room humming and singing, for he thought there
would be plenty of time left to clean out the stable; "but it would be
amusing to steal a glance into his other rooms as well," thought the
Prince, "for there must be something that he is afraid of my seeing,
as I am not allowed to enter them." So he went into the first room.
A cauldron was hanging from the walls; it was boiling, but the Prince
could see no fire under it. "I wonder what is inside it," he thought,
and dipped a lock of his hair in, and the hair became just as if it were
all made of copper. "That's a nice kind of soup. If anyone were to taste
that his throat would be gilded," said the youth, and then he went into
the next chamber. There, too, a cauldron was hanging from the wall,
bubbling and boiling, but there was no fire under this either. "I will
just try what this is like too," said the Prince, thrusting another lock
of his hair into it, and it came out silvered over. "Such costly soup is
not to be had in my father's palace," said the Prince; "but everything
depends on how it tastes," and then he went into the third room. There,
too, a cauldron was hanging from the wall, boiling, exactly the same
as in the two other rooms, and the Prince took pleasure in trying this
also, so he dipped a lock of hair in, and it came out so brightly gilded
that it shone again. "Some talk about going from bad to worse," said the
Prince; "but this is better and better. If he boils gold here, what can
he boil in there?" He was determined to see, and went through the door
into the fourth room. No cauldron was to be seen there, but on a bench
someone was seated who was like a king's daughter, but, whosoever she
was, she was so beautiful that never in the Prince's life had he seen
her equal.

"Oh! in heaven's name what are you doing here?" said she who sat upon
the bench.

"I took the place of servant here yesterday," said the Prince.

"May you soon have a better place, if you have come to serve here!" said
she.

"Oh, but I think I have got a kind master," said the Prince. "He has not
given me hard work to do to-day. When I have cleaned out the stable I
shall be done."

"Yes, but how will you be able to do that?" she asked again. "If you
clean it out as other people do, ten pitchforksful will come in for
every one you throw out. But I will teach you how to do it; you must
turn your pitchfork upside down, and work with the handle, and then all
will fly out of its own accord."

"Yes, I will attend to that," said the Prince, and stayed sitting where
he was the whole day, for it was soon settled between them that they
would marry each other, he and the King's daughter; so the first day of
his service with the giant did not seem long to him. But when evening
was drawing near she said that it would now be better for him to clean
out the stable before the giant came home. When he got there he had a
fancy to try if what she had said were true, so he began to work in the
same way that he had seen the stable-boys doing in his father's stables,
but he soon saw that he must give up that, for when he had worked a very
short time he had scarcely any room left to stand. So he did what the
Princess had taught him, turned the pitchfork round, and worked with the
handle, and in the twinkling of an eye the stable was as clean as if
it had been scoured. When he had done that, he went back again into the
room in which the giant had given him leave to stay, and there he walked
backward and forward on the floor, and began to hum and sing.

Then came the giant home with the goats. "Have you cleaned the stable?"
asked the giant.

"Yes, now it is clean and sweet, master," said the King's son.

"I shall see about that," said the giant, and went round to the stable,
but it was just as the Prince had said.

"You have certainly been talking to my Master-maid, for you never got
that out of your own head," said the giant.

"Master-maid! What kind of a thing is that, master?" said the Prince,
making himself look as stupid as an ass; "I should like to see that."

"Well, you will see her quite soon enough," said the giant.

On the second morning the giant had again to go out with his goats,
so he told the Prince that on that day he was to fetch home his horse,
which was out on the mountain-side, and when he had done that he might
rest himself for the remainder of the day, "for you have come to a kind
master, and that you shall find," said the giant once more. "But do not
go into any of the rooms that I spoke of yesterday, or I will wring your
head off," said he, and then went away with his flock of goats.

"Yes, indeed, you are a kind master," said the Prince; "but I will go
in and talk to the Master-maid again; perhaps before long she may like
better to be mine than yours."

So he went to her. Then she asked him what he had to do that day.

"Oh! not very dangerous work, I fancy," said the King's son. "I have
only to go up the mountain-side after his horse."

"Well, how do you mean to set about it?" asked the Master-maid.

"Oh! there is no great art in riding a horse home," said the King's son.
"I think I must have ridden friskier horses before now."

"Yes, but it is not so easy a thing as you think to ride the horse
home," said the Master-maid; "but I will teach you what to do. When you
go near it, fire will burst out of its nostrils like flames from a pine
torch; but be very careful, and take the bridle which is hanging by the
door there, and fling the bit straight into his jaws, and then it will
become so tame that you will be able to do what you like with it." He
said he would bear this in mind, and then he again sat in there the
whole day by the Master-maid, and they chatted and talked of one thing
and another, but the first thing and the last now was, how happy and
delightful it would be if they could but marry each other, and get
safely away from the giant; and the Prince would have forgotten both the
mountain-side and the horse if the Master-maid had not reminded him of
them as evening drew near, and said that now it would be better if he
went to fetch the horse before the giant came. So he did this, and
took the bridle which was hanging on a crook, and strode up the
mountain-side, and it was not long before he met with the horse, and
fire and red flames streamed forth out of its nostrils. But the youth
carefully watched his opportunity, and just as it was rushing at him
with open jaws he threw the bit straight into its mouth, and the horse
stood as quiet as a young lamb, and there was no difficulty at all in
getting it home to the stable. Then the Prince went back into his room
again, and began to hum and to sing.

Toward evening the giant came home. "Have you fetched the horse back
from the mountain-side?" he asked.

"That I have, master; it was an amusing horse to ride, but I rode him
straight home, and put him in the stable too," said the Prince.

"I will see about that," said the giant, and went out to the stable,
but the horse was standing there just as the Prince had said. "You have
certainly been talking with my Master-maid, for you never got that out
of your own head," said the giant again.

"Yesterday, master, you talked about this Master-maid, and to-day you
are talking about her; ah, heaven bless you, master, why will you not
show me the thing? for it would be a real pleasure to me to see it,"
said the Prince, who again pretended to be silly and stupid.

"Oh! you will see her quite soon enough," said the giant.

On the morning of the third day the giant again had to go into the wood
with the goats. "To-day you must go underground and fetch my taxes,"
he said to the Prince. "When you have done this, you may rest for the
remainder of the day, for you shall see what an easy master you have
come to," and then he went away.

"Well, however easy a master you may be, you set me very hard work
to do," thought the Prince; "but I will see if I cannot find your
Master-maid; you say she is yours, but for all that she may be able
to tell me what to do now," and he went back to her. So, when the
Master-maid asked him what the giant had set him to do that day, he told
her that he was to go underground and get the taxes.

"And how will you set about that?" said the Master-maid.

"Oh! you must tell me how to do it," said the Prince, "for I have never
yet been underground, and even if I knew the way I do not know how much
I am to demand."

"Oh! yes, I will soon tell you that; you must go to the rock there under
the mountain-ridge, and take the club that is there, and knock on the
rocky wall," said the Master-maid. "Then someone will come out who will
sparkle with fire; you shall tell him your errand, and when he asks you
how much you want to have you are to say: 'As much as I can carry.'"

"Yes, I will keep that in mind," said he, and then he sat there with the
Master-maid the whole day, until night drew near, and he would gladly
have stayed there till now if the Master-maid had not reminded him that
it was time to be off to fetch the taxes before the giant came.

So he set out on his way, and did exactly what the Master-maid had told
him. He went to the rocky wall, and took the club, and knocked on it.
Then came one so full of sparks that they flew both out of his eyes and
his nose. "What do you want?" said he.

"I was to come here for the giant, and demand the tax for him," said the
King's son.

"How much are you to have then?" said the other.

"I ask for no more than I am able to carry with me," said the Prince.

"It is well for you that you have not asked for a horse-load," said he
who had come out of the rock. "But now come in with me."

This the Prince did, and what a quantity of gold and silver he saw! It
was lying inside the mountain like heaps of stones in a waste place, and
he got a load that was as large as he was able to carry, and with that
he went his way. So in the evening, when the giant came home with the
goats, the Prince went into the chamber and hummed and sang again as he
had done on the other two evenings.

"Have you been for the tax?" said the giant.

"Yes, that I have, master," said the Prince.

"Where have you put it then?" said the giant again.

"The bag of gold is standing there on the bench," said the Prince.

"I will see about that," said the giant, and went away to the bench,
but the bag was standing there, and it was so full that gold and silver
dropped out when the giant untied the string.

"You have certainly been talking with my Master-maid!" said the giant,
"and if you have I will wring your neck."

"Master-maid?" said the Prince; "yesterday my master talked about this
Master-maid, and to-day he is talking about her again, and the first
day of all it was talk of the same kind. I do wish I could see the thing
myself," said he.

"Yes, yes, wait till to-morrow," said the giant, "and then I myself will
take you to her."

"Ah! master, I thank you--but you are only mocking me," said the King's
son.

Next day the giant took him to the Master-maid. "Now you shall kill him,
and boil him in the great big cauldron you know of, and when you have
got the broth ready give me a call," said the giant; then he lay down
on the bench to sleep, and almost immediately began to snore so that it
sounded like thunder among the hills.

So the Master-maid took a knife, and cut the Prince's little finger, and
dropped three drops of blood upon a wooden stool; then she took all the
old rags, and shoe-soles, and all the rubbish she could lay hands on,
and put them in the cauldron; and then she filled a chest with gold
dust, and a lump of salt, and a water-flask which was hanging by the
door, and she also took with her a golden apple, and two gold chickens;
and then she and the Prince went away with all the speed they could,
and when they had gone a little way they came to the sea, and then
they sailed, but where they got the ship from I have never been able to
learn.

Now, when the giant had slept a good long time, he began to stretch
himself on the bench on which he was lying. "Will it soon boil?" said
he.

"It is just beginning," said the first drop of blood on the stool.

So the giant lay down to sleep again, and slept for a long, long time.
Then he began to move about a little again. "Will it soon be ready now?"
said he, but he did not look up this time any more than he had done the
first time, for he was still half asleep.

"Half done!" said the second drop of blood, and the giant believed it
was the Master-maid again, and turned himself on the bench, and lay down
to sleep once more. When he had slept again for many hours, he began to
move and stretch himself. "Is it not done yet?" said he.

"It is quite ready," said the third drop of blood. Then the giant began
to sit up and rub his eyes, but he could not see who it was who had
spoken to him, so he asked for the Master-maid, and called her. But
there was no one to give him an answer.

"Ah! well, she has just stolen out for a little," thought the giant, and
he took a spoon, and went off to the cauldron to have a taste; but there
was nothing in it but shoe-soles, and rags, and such trumpery as that,
and all was boiled up together, so that he could not tell whether it
was porridge or milk pottage. When he saw this, he understood what had
happened, and fell into such a rage that he hardly knew what he was
doing. Away he went after the Prince and the Master-maid so fast that
the wind whistled behind him, and it was not long before he came to the
water, but he could not get over it. "Well, well, I will soon find a
cure for that; I have only to call my river-sucker," said the giant, and
he did call him. So his river-sucker came and lay down, and drank one,
two, three draughts, and with that the water in the sea fell so low that
the giant saw the Master-maid and the Prince out on the sea in their
ship. "Now you must throw out the lump of salt," said the Master-maid,
and the Prince did so, and it grew up into such a great high mountain
right across the sea that the giant could not come over it, and the
river-sucker could not drink any more water. "Well, well, I will soon
find a cure for that," said the giant, so he called to his hill-borer
to come and bore through the mountain so that the river-sucker might be
able to drink up the water again. But just as the hole was made, and the
river-sucker was beginning to drink, the Master-maid told the Prince to
throw one or two drops out of the flask, and when he did this the sea
instantly became full of water again, and before the river-sucker
could take one drink they reached the land and were in safety. So they
determined to go home to the Prince's father, but the Prince would on no
account permit the Master-maid to walk there, for he thought that it was
unbecoming either for her or for him to go on foot.

"Wait here the least little bit of time, while I go home for the seven
horses which stand in my father's stable," said he; "it is not far off,
and I shall not be long away, but I will not let my betrothed bride go
on foot to the palace."

"Oh! no, do not go, for if you go home to the King's palace you will
forget me, I foresee that."

"How could I forget you? We have suffered so much evil together, and
love each other so much," said the Prince; and he insisted on going home
for the coach with the seven horses, and she was to wait for him there,
by the sea-shore. So at last the Master-maid had to yield, for he was
so absolutely determined to do it. "But when you get there you must
not even give yourself time to greet anyone, but go straight into the
stable, and take the horses, and put them in the coach, and drive back
as quickly as you can. For they will all come round about you; but you
must behave just as if you did not see them, and on no account must you
taste anything, for if you do it will cause great misery both to you and
to me," said she; and this he promised.

But when he got home to the King's palace one of his brothers was just
going to be married, and the bride and all her kith and kin had come
to the palace; so they all thronged round him, and questioned him about
this and that, and wanted him to go in with them; but he behaved as if
he did not see them, and went straight to the stable, and got out the
horses and began to harness them. When they saw that they could not by
any means prevail on him to go in with them, they came out to him with
meat and drink, and the best of everything that they had prepared for
the wedding; but the Prince refused to touch anything, and would do
nothing but put the horses in as quickly as he could. At last, however,
the bride's sister rolled an apple across the yard to him, and said: "As
you won't eat anything else, you may like to take a bite of that, for
you must be both hungry and thirsty after your long journey." And he
took up the apple and bit a piece out of it. But no sooner had he got
the piece of apple in his mouth than he forgot the Master-maid and that
he was to go back in the coach to fetch her.

"I think I must be mad! what do I want with this coach and horses?" said
he; and then he put the horses back into the stable, and went into the
King's palace, and there it was settled that he should marry the bride's
sister, who had rolled the apple to him.

The Master-maid sat by the sea-shore for a long, long time, waiting
for the Prince, but no Prince came. So she went away, and when she had
walked a short distance she came to a little hut which stood all alone
in a small wood, hard by the King's palace. She entered it and asked if
she might be allowed to stay there. The hut belonged to an old crone,
who was also an ill-tempered and malicious troll. At first she would not
let the Master-maid remain with her; but at last, after a long time, by
means of good words and good payment, she obtained leave. But the hut
was as dirty and black inside as a pigsty, so the Master-maid said that
she would smarten it up a little, that it might look a little more like
what other people's houses looked inside. The old crone did not like
this either. She scowled, and was very cross, but the Master-maid did
not trouble herself about that. She took out her chest of gold, and
flung a handful of it or so into the fire, and the gold boiled up and
poured out over the whole of the hut, until every part of it both inside
and out was gilded. But when the gold began to bubble up the old hag
grew so terrified that she fled as if the Evil One himself were pursuing
her, and she did not remember to stoop down as she went through the
doorway, and so she split her head and died. Next morning the sheriff
came traveling by there. He was greatly astonished when he saw the gold
hut shining and glittering there in the copse, and he was still more
astonished when he went in and caught sight of the beautiful young
maiden who was sitting there; he fell in love with her at once, and
straightway on the spot he begged her, both prettily and kindly, to
marry him.

"Well, but have you a great deal of money?" said the Master-maid.

"Oh! yes; so far as that is concerned, I am not ill off," said the
sheriff. So now he had to go home to get the money, and in the evening
he came back, bringing with him a bag with two bushels in it, which he
set down on the bench. Well, as he had such a fine lot of money, the
Master-maid said she would have him, so they sat down to talk.

But scarcely had they sat down together before the Master-maid wanted to
jump up again. "I have forgotten to see to the fire," she said.

"Why should you jump up to do that?" said the sheriff; "I will do that!"
So he jumped up, and went to the chimney in one bound.

"Just tell me when you have got hold of the shovel," said the
Master-maid.

"Well, I have hold of it now," said the sheriff.

"Then you may hold the shovel, and the shovel you, and pour red-hot
coals over you, till day dawns," said the Master-maid. So the sheriff
had to stand there the whole night and pour red-hot coals over himself,
and, no matter how much he cried and begged and entreated, the red-hot
coals did not grow the colder for that. When the day began to dawn, and
he had power to throw down the shovel, he did not stay long where he
was, but ran away as fast as he possibly could; and everyone who met him
stared and looked after him, for he was flying as if he were mad, and he
could not have looked worse if he had been both flayed and tanned, and
everyone wondered where he had been, but for very shame he would tell
nothing.

The next day the attorney came riding by the place where the Master-maid
dwelt. He saw how brightly the hut shone and gleamed through the wood,
and he too went into it to see who lived there, and when he entered and
saw the beautiful young maiden he fell even more in love with her than
the sheriff had done, and began to woo her at once. So the Master-maid
asked him, as she had asked the sheriff, if he had a great deal of
money, and the attorney said he was not ill off for that, and would at
once go home to get it; and at night he came with a great big sack of
money--this time it was a four-bushel sack--and set it on the bench by
the Master-maid. So she promised to have him, and he sat down on the
bench by her to arrange about it, but suddenly she said that she had
forgotten to lock the door of the porch that night, and must do it.

"Why should you do that?" said the attorney; "sit still, I will do it."

So he was on his feet in a moment, and out in the porch.

"Tell me when you have got hold of the door-latch," said the
Master-maid.

"I have hold of it now," cried the attorney.

"Then you may hold the door, and the door you, and may you go between
wall and wall till day dawns."

What a dance the attorney had that night! He had never had such a waltz
before, and he never wished to have such a dance again. Sometimes he was
in front of the door, and sometimes the door was in front of him, and
it went from one side of the porch to the other, till the attorney was
well-nigh beaten to death. At first he began to abuse the Master-maid,
and then to beg and pray, but the door did not care for anything but
keeping him where he was till break of day.

As soon as the door let go its hold of him, off went the attorney. He
forgot who ought to be paid off for what he had suffered, he forgot
both his sack of money and his wooing, for he was so afraid lest the
house-door should come dancing after him. Everyone who met him stared
and looked after him, for he was flying like a madman, and he could not
have looked worse if a herd of rams had been butting at him all night
long.

On the third day the bailiff came by, and he too saw the gold house
in the little wood, and he too felt that he must go and see who lived
there; and when he caught sight of the Master-maid he became so much in
love with her that he wooed her almost before he greeted her.

The Master-maid answered him as she had answered the other two, that
if he had a great deal of money, she would have him. "So far as that is
concerned, I am not ill off," said the bailiff; so he was at once told
to go home and fetch it, and this he did. At night he came back, and he
had a still larger sack of money with him than the attorney had brought;
it must have been at least six bushels, and he set it down on the bench.
So it was settled that he was to have the Master-maid. But hardly had
they sat down together before she said that she had forgotten to bring
in the calf, and must go out to put it in the byre.

"No, indeed, you shall not do that," said the bailiff; "I am the one to
do that." And, big and fat as he was, he went out as briskly as a boy.

"Tell me when you have got hold of the calf's tail," said the
Master-maid.

"I have hold of it now," cried the bailiff.

"Then may you hold the calf's tail, and the calf's tail hold you,
and may you go round the world together till day dawns!" said the
Master-maid. So the bailiff had to bestir himself, for the calf went
over rough and smooth, over hill and dale, and, the more the bailiff
cried and screamed, the faster the calf went. When daylight began to
appear, the bailiff was half dead; and so glad was he to leave loose
of the calf's tail, that he forgot the sack of money and all else. He
walked now slowly--more slowly than the sheriff and the attorney had
done, but, the slower he went, the more time had everyone to stare and
look at him; and they used it too, and no one can imagine how tired out
and ragged he looked after his dance with the calf.

On the following day the wedding was to take place in the King's palace,
and the elder brother was to drive to church with his bride, and the
brother who had been with the giant with her sister. But when they had
seated themselves in the coach and were about to drive off from the
palace one of the trace-pins broke, and, though they made one, two, and
three to put in its place, that did not help them, for each broke in
turn, no matter what kind of wood they used to make them of. This went
on for a long time, and they could not get away from the palace, so they
were all in great trouble. Then the sheriff said (for he too had been
bidden to the wedding at Court): "Yonder away in the thicket dwells a
maiden, and if you can get her to lend you the handle of the shovel that
she uses to make up her fire I know very well that it will hold fast."
So they sent off a messenger to the thicket, and begged so prettily that
they might have the loan of her shovel-handle of which the sheriff had
spoken that they were not refused; so now they had a trace-pin which
would not snap in two.

But all at once, just as they were starting, the bottom of the coach
fell in pieces. They made a new bottom as fast as they could, but, no
matter how they nailed it together, or what kind of wood they used,
no sooner had they got the new bottom into the coach and were about to
drive off than it broke again, so that they were still worse off than
when they had broken the trace-pin. Then the attorney said, for he too
was at the wedding in the palace: "Away there in the thicket dwells
a maiden, and if you could but get her to lend you one-half of her
porch-door I am certain that it will hold together." So they again sent
a messenger to the thicket, and begged so prettily for the loan of the
gilded porch-door of which the attorney had told them that they got it
at once. They were just setting out again, but now the horses were not
able to draw the coach. They had six horses already, and now they put in
eight, and then ten, and then twelve, but the more they put in, and
the more the coachman whipped them, the less good it did; and the coach
never stirred from the spot. It was already beginning to be late in the
day, and to church they must and would go, so everyone who was in the
palace was in a state of distress. Then the bailiff spoke up and said:
"Out there in the gilded cottage in the thicket dwells a girl, and if
you could but get her to lend you her calf I know it could draw the
coach, even if it were as heavy as a mountain." They all thought that
it was ridiculous to be drawn to church by a calf, but there was nothing
else for it but to send a messenger once more, and beg as prettily as
they could, on behalf of the King, that she would let them have the loan
of the calf that the bailiff had told them about. The Master-maid let
them have it immediately--this time also she would not say "no."

Then they harnessed the calf to see if the coach would move; and away
it went, over rough and smooth, over stock and stone, so that they could
scarcely breathe, and sometimes they were on the ground, and sometimes
up in the air; and when they came to the church the coach began to
go round and round like a spinning-wheel, and it was with the utmost
difficulty and danger that they were able to get out of the coach and
into the church. And when they went back again the coach went quicker
still, so that most of them did not know how they got back to the palace
at all.

When they had seated themselves at the table the Prince who had been in
service with the giant said that he thought they ought to have invited
the maiden who had lent them the shovel-handle, and the porch-door,
and the calf up to the palace, "for," said he, "if we had not got these
three things, we should never have got away from the palace."

The King also thought that this was both just and proper, so he sent
five of his best men down to the gilded hut, to greet the maiden
courteously from the King, and to beg her to be so good as to come up to
the palace to dinner at mid-day.

"Greet the King, and tell him that, if he is too good to come to me, I
am too good to come to him," replied the Master-maid.

So the King had to go himself, and the Master-maid went with him
immediately, and, as the King believed that she was more than she
appeared to be, he seated her in the place of honor by the youngest
bridegroom. When they had sat at the table for a short time, the
Master-maid took out the cock, and the hen, and the golden apple which
she had brought away with her from the giant's house, and set them on
the table in front of her, and instantly the cock and the hen began to
fight with each other for the golden apple.

"Oh! look how those two there are fighting for the golden apple," said
the King's son.

"Yes, and so did we two fight to get out that time when we were in the
mountain," said the Master-maid.

So the Prince knew her again, and you may imagine how delighted he was.
He ordered the troll-witch who had rolled the apple to him to be torn
in pieces between four-and-twenty horses, so that not a bit of her was
left, and then for the first time they began really to keep the wedding,
and, weary as they were, the sheriff, the attorney, and the bailiff kept
it up too.(1)


(1) Asbjornsen and Moe.




WHY THE SEA IS SALT


Once upon a time, long, long ago, there were two brothers, the one rich
and the other poor. When Christmas Eve came, the poor one had not a bite
in the house, either of meat or bread; so he went to his brother, and
begged him, in God's name, to give him something for Christmas Day. It
was by no means the first time that the brother had been forced to give
something to him, and he was not better pleased at being asked now than
he generally was.

"If you will do what I ask you, you shall have a whole ham," said he.
The poor one immediately thanked him, and promised this.

"Well, here is the ham, and now you must go straight to Dead Man's
Hall," said the rich brother, throwing the ham to him.

"Well, I will do what I have promised," said the other, and he took
the ham and set off. He went on and on for the livelong day, and at
nightfall he came to a place where there was a bright light.

"I have no doubt this is the place," thought the man with the ham.

An old man with a long white beard was standing in the outhouse,
chopping Yule logs.

"Good-evening," said the man with the ham.

"Good-evening to you. Where are you going at this late hour?" said the
man.

"I am going to Dead Man's Hall, if only I am on the right track,"
answered the poor man.

"Oh! yes, you are right enough, for it is here," said the old man. "When
you get inside they will all want to buy your ham, for they don't get
much meat to eat there; but you must not sell it unless you can get the
hand-mill which stands behind the door for it. When you come out again
I will teach you how to stop the hand-mill, which is useful for almost
everything."

So the man with the ham thanked the other for his good advice, and
rapped at the door.

When he got in, everything happened just as the old man had said it
would: all the people, great and small, came round him like ants on an
ant-hill, and each tried to outbid the other for the ham.

"By rights my old woman and I ought to have it for our Christmas dinner,
but, since you have set your hearts upon it, I must just give it up to
you," said the man. "But, if I sell it, I will have the hand-mill which
is standing there behind the door."

At first they would not hear of this, and haggled and bargained with
the man, but he stuck to what he had said, and the people were forced
to give him the hand-mill. When the man came out again into the yard, he
asked the old wood-cutter how he was to stop the hand-mill, and when he
had learned that, he thanked him and set off home with all the speed he
could, but did not get there until after the clock had struck twelve on
Christmas Eve.

"Where in the world have you been?" said the old woman. "Here I have sat
waiting hour after hour, and have not even two sticks to lay across each
other under the Christmas porridge-pot."

"Oh! I could not come before; I had something of importance to see
about, and a long way to go, too; but now you shall just see!" said the
man, and then he set the hand-mill on the table, and bade it first grind
light, then a table-cloth, and then meat, and beer, and everything else
that was good for a Christmas Eve's supper; and the mill ground all that
he ordered. "Bless me!" said the old woman as one thing after another
appeared; and she wanted to know where her husband had got the mill
from, but he would not tell her that.

"Never mind where I got it; you can see that it is a good one, and the
water that turns it will never freeze," said the man. So he ground meat
and drink, and all kinds of good things, to last all Christmas-tide, and
on the third day he invited all his friends to come to a feast.

Now when the rich brother saw all that there was at the banquet and in
the house, he was both vexed and angry, for he grudged everything his
brother had. "On Christmas Eve he was so poor that he came to me and
begged for a trifle, for God's sake, and now he gives a feast as if he
were both a count and a king!" thought he. "But, for heaven's sake, tell
me where you got your riches from," said he to his brother.

"From behind the door," said he who owned the mill, for he did not
choose to satisfy his brother on that point; but later in the evening,
when he had taken a drop too much, he could not refrain from telling how
he had come by the hand-mill. "There you see what has brought me all my
wealth!" said he, and brought out the mill, and made it grind first one
thing and then another. When the brother saw that, he insisted on having
the mill, and after a great deal of persuasion got it; but he had to
give three hundred dollars for it, and the poor brother was to keep it
till the haymaking was over, for he thought: "If I keep it as long as
that, I can make it grind meat and drink that will last many a long
year." During that time you may imagine that the mill did not grow
rusty, and when hay-harvest came the rich brother got it, but the other
had taken good care not to teach him how to stop it. It was evening when
the rich man got the mill home, and in the morning he bade the old woman
go out and spread the hay after the mowers, and he would attend to the
house himself that day, he said.

So, when dinner-time drew near, he set the mill on the kitchen-table,
and said: "Grind herrings and milk pottage, and do it both quickly and
well."

So the mill began to grind herrings and milk pottage, and first all
the dishes and tubs were filled, and then it came out all over the
kitchen-floor. The man twisted and turned it, and did all he could to
make the mill stop, but, howsoever he turned it and screwed it, the mill
went on grinding, and in a short time the pottage rose so high that the
man was like to be drowned. So he threw open the parlor door, but it was
not long before the mill had ground the parlor full too, and it was
with difficulty and danger that the man could go through the stream of
pottage and get hold of the door-latch. When he got the door open, he
did not stay long in the room, but ran out, and the herrings and pottage
came after him, and it streamed out over both farm and field. Now the
old woman, who was out spreading the hay, began to think dinner was long
in coming, and said to the women and the mowers: "Though the master does
not call us home, we may as well go. It may be that he finds he is not
good at making pottage and I should do well to help him." So they began
to straggle homeward, but when they had got a little way up the hill
they met the herrings and pottage and bread, all pouring forth and
winding about one over the other, and the man himself in front of the
flood. "Would to heaven that each of you had a hundred stomachs! Take
care that you are not drowned in the pottage!" he cried as he went by
them as if Mischief were at his heels, down to where his brother dwelt.
Then he begged him, for God's sake, to take the mill back again, and
that in an instant, for, said he: "If it grind one hour more the whole
district will be destroyed by herrings and pottage." But the brother
would not take it until the other paid him three hundred dollars, and
that he was obliged to do. Now the poor brother had both the money and
the mill again. So it was not long before he had a farmhouse much finer
than that in which his brother lived, but the mill ground him so much
money that he covered it with plates of gold; and the farmhouse lay
close by the sea-shore, so it shone and glittered far out to sea.
Everyone who sailed by there now had to be put in to visit the rich man
in the gold farmhouse, and everyone wanted to see the wonderful mill,
for the report of it spread far and wide, and there was no one who had
not heard tell of it.

After a long, long time came also a skipper who wished to see the mill.
He asked if it could make salt. "Yes, it could make salt," said he who
owned it, and when the skipper heard that, he wished with all his might
and main to have the mill, let it cost what it might, for, he thought,
if he had it, he would get off having to sail far away over the perilous
sea for freights of salt. At first the man would not hear of parting
with it, but the skipper begged and prayed, and at last the man sold it
to him, and got many, many thousand dollars for it. When the skipper
had got the mill on his back he did not stay there long, for he was so
afraid that the man would change his mind, and he had no time to ask
how he was to stop it grinding, but got on board his ship as fast as he
could.

When he had gone a little way out to sea he took the mill on deck.
"Grind salt, and grind both quickly and well," said the skipper. So the
mill began to grind salt, till it spouted out like water, and when
the skipper had got the ship filled he wanted to stop the mill, but
whichsoever way he turned it, and how much soever he tried, it went on
grinding, and the heap of salt grew higher and higher, until at last the
ship sank. There lies the mill at the bottom of the sea, and still, day
by day, it grinds on; and that is why the sea is salt.(1)


(1) Asbjornsen and Moe.




THE MASTER CAT; OR, PUSS IN BOOTS


There was a miller who left no more estate to the three sons he had than
his mill, his ass, and his cat. The partition was soon made. Neither
scrivener nor attorney was sent for. They would soon have eaten up all
the poor patrimony. The eldest had the mill, the second the ass, and
the youngest nothing but the cat. The poor young fellow was quite
comfortless at having so poor a lot.

"My brothers," said he, "may get their living handsomely enough by
joining their stocks together; but for my part, when I have eaten up my
cat, and made me a muff of his skin, I must die of hunger."

The Cat, who heard all this, but made as if he did not, said to him with
a grave and serious air:

"Do not thus afflict yourself, my good master. You have nothing else to
do but to give me a bag and get a pair of boots made for me that I may
scamper through the dirt and the brambles, and you shall see that you
have not so bad a portion in me as you imagine."

The Cat's master did not build very much upon what he said. He had often
seen him play a great many cunning tricks to catch rats and mice, as
when he used to hang by the heels, or hide himself in the meal, and
make as if he were dead; so that he did not altogether despair of his
affording him some help in his miserable condition. When the Cat had
what he asked for he booted himself very gallantly, and putting his bag
about his neck, he held the strings of it in his two forepaws and went
into a warren where was great abundance of rabbits. He put bran and
sow-thistle into his bag, and stretching out at length, as if he had
been dead, he waited for some young rabbits, not yet acquainted with the
deceits of the world, to come and rummage his bag for what he had put
into it.

Scarce was he lain down but he had what he wanted. A rash and foolish
young rabbit jumped into his bag, and Monsieur Puss, immediately drawing
close the strings, took and killed him without pity. Proud of his prey,
he went with it to the palace and asked to speak with his majesty.
He was shown upstairs into the King's apartment, and, making a low
reverence, said to him:

"I have brought you, sir, a rabbit of the warren, which my noble lord
the Marquis of Carabas" (for that was the title which puss was pleased
to give his master) "has commanded me to present to your majesty from
him."

"Tell thy master," said the king, "that I thank him and that he does me
a great deal of pleasure."

Another time he went and hid himself among some standing corn, holding
still his bag open, and when a brace of partridges ran into it he drew
the strings and so caught them both. He went and made a present of these
to the king, as he had done before of the rabbit which he took in the
warren. The king, in like manner, received the partridges with great
pleasure, and ordered him some money for drink.

The Cat continued for two or three months thus to carry his Majesty,
from time to time, game of his master's taking. One day in particular,
when he knew for certain that he was to take the air along the
river-side, with his daughter, the most beautiful princess in the world,
he said to his master:

"If you will follow my advice your fortune is made. You have nothing
else to do but go and wash yourself in the river, in that part I shall
show you, and leave the rest to me."

The Marquis of Carabas did what the Cat advised him to, without knowing
why or wherefore. While he was washing the King passed by, and the Cat
began to cry out:

"Help! help! My Lord Marquis of Carabas is going to be drowned."

At this noise the King put his head out of the coach-window, and,
finding it was the Cat who had so often brought him such good game,
he commanded his guards to run immediately to the assistance of his
Lordship the Marquis of Carabas. While they were drawing the poor
Marquis out of the river, the Cat came up to the coach and told the King
that, while his master was washing, there came by some rogues, who
went off with his clothes, though he had cried out: "Thieves! thieves!"
several times, as loud as he could.

This cunning Cat had hidden them under a great stone. The King
immediately commanded the officers of his wardrobe to run and fetch one
of his best suits for the Lord Marquis of Carabas.

The King caressed him after a very extraordinary manner, and as the fine
clothes he had given him extremely set off his good mien (for he was
well made and very handsome in his person), the King's daughter took a
secret inclination to him, and the Marquis of Carabas had no sooner cast
two or three respectful and somewhat tender glances but she fell in love
with him to distraction. The King would needs have him come into the
coach and take part of the airing. The Cat, quite overjoyed to see his
project begin to succeed, marched on before, and, meeting with some
countrymen, who were mowing a meadow, he said to them:

"Good people, you who are mowing, if you do not tell the King that
the meadow you mow belongs to my Lord Marquis of Carabas, you shall be
chopped as small as herbs for the pot."

The King did not fail asking of the mowers to whom the meadow they were
mowing belonged.

"To my Lord Marquis of Carabas," answered they altogether, for the Cat's
threats had made them terribly afraid.

"You see, sir," said the Marquis, "this is a meadow which never fails to
yield a plentiful harvest every year."

The Master Cat, who went still on before, met with some reapers, and
said to them:

"Good people, you who are reaping, if you do not tell the King that all
this corn belongs to the Marquis of Carabas, you shall be chopped as
small as herbs for the pot."

The King, who passed by a moment after, would needs know to whom all
that corn, which he then saw, did belong.

"To my Lord Marquis of Carabas," replied the reapers, and the King was
very well pleased with it, as well as the Marquis, whom he congratulated
thereupon. The Master Cat, who went always before, said the same words
to all he met, and the King was astonished at the vast estates of my
Lord Marquis of Carabas.

Monsieur Puss came at last to a stately castle, the master of which was
an ogre, the richest had ever been known; for all the lands which the
King had then gone over belonged to this castle. The Cat, who had taken
care to inform himself who this ogre was and what he could do, asked
to speak with him, saying he could not pass so near his castle without
having the honor of paying his respects to him.

The ogre received him as civilly as an ogre could do, and made him sit
down.

"I have been assured," said the Cat, "that you have the gift of being
able to change yourself into all sorts of creatures you have a mind to;
you can, for example, transform yourself into a lion, or elephant, and
the like."

"That is true," answered the ogre very briskly; "and to convince you,
you shall see me now become a lion."

Puss was so sadly terrified at the sight of a lion so near him that he
immediately got into the gutter, not without abundance of trouble and
danger, because of his boots, which were of no use at all to him in
walking upon the tiles. A little while after, when Puss saw that the
ogre had resumed his natural form, he came down, and owned he had been
very much frightened.

"I have been, moreover, informed," said the Cat, "but I know not how to
believe it, that you have also the power to take on you the shape of the
smallest animals; for example, to change yourself into a rat or a mouse;
but I must own to you I take this to be impossible."

"Impossible!" cried the ogre; "you shall see that presently."

And at the same time he changed himself into a mouse, and began to run
about the floor. Puss no sooner perceived this but he fell upon him and
ate him up.

Meanwhile the King, who saw, as he passed, this fine castle of the
ogre's, had a mind to go into it. Puss, who heard the noise of his
Majesty's coach running over the draw-bridge, ran out, and said to the
King:

"Your Majesty is welcome to this castle of my Lord Marquis of Carabas."

"What! my Lord Marquis," cried the King, "and does this castle also
belong to you? There can be nothing finer than this court and all the
stately buildings which surround it; let us go into it, if you please."

The Marquis gave his hand to the Princess, and followed the King,
who went first. They passed into a spacious hall, where they found a
magnificent collation, which the ogre had prepared for his friends, who
were that very day to visit him, but dared not to enter, knowing
the King was there. His Majesty was perfectly charmed with the good
qualities of my Lord Marquis of Carabas, as was his daughter, who
had fallen violently in love with him, and, seeing the vast estate he
possessed, said to him, after having drunk five or six glasses:

"It will be owing to yourself only, my Lord Marquis, if you are not my
son-in-law."

The Marquis, making several low bows, accepted the honor which his
Majesty conferred upon him, and forthwith, that very same day, married
the Princess.

Puss became a great lord, and never ran after mice any more but only for
his diversion.(1)


(1) Charles Perrault.




FELICIA AND THE POT OF PINKS


Once upon a time there was a poor laborer who, feeling that he had not
much longer to live, wished to divide his possessions between his son
and daughter, whom he loved dearly.

So he called them to him, and said: "Your mother brought me as her dowry
two stools and a straw bed; I have, besides, a hen, a pot of pinks, and
a silver ring, which were given me by a noble lady who once lodged in my
poor cottage. When she went away she said to me:

"'Be careful of my gifts, good man; see that you do not lose the ring or
forget to water the pinks. As for your daughter, I promise you that she
shall be more beautiful than anyone you ever saw in your life; call her
Felicia, and when she grows up give her the ring and the pot of pinks to
console her for her poverty.' Take them both, then, my dear child," he
added, "and your brother shall have everything else."

The two children seemed quite contented, and when their father died they
wept for him, and divided his possessions as he had told them. Felicia
believed that her brother loved her, but when she sat down upon one of
the stools he said angrily:

"Keep your pot of pinks and your ring, but let my things alone. I like
order in my house."

Felicia, who was very gentle, said nothing, but stood up crying quietly;
while Bruno, for that was her brother's name, sat comfortably by the
fire. Presently, when supper-time came, Bruno had a delicious egg, and
he threw the shell to Felicia, saying:

"There, that is all I can give you; if you don't like it, go out and
catch frogs; there are plenty of them in the marsh close by." Felicia
did not answer, but she cried more bitterly than ever, and went away
to her own little room. She found it filled with the sweet scent of the
pinks, and, going up to them, she said sadly:

"Beautiful pinks, you are so sweet and so pretty, you are the only
comfort I have left. Be very sure that I will take care of you, and
water you well, and never allow any cruel hand to tear you from your
stems."

As she leaned over them she noticed that they were very dry. So taking
her pitcher, she ran off in the clear moonlight to the fountain, which
was at some distance. When she reached it she sat down upon the brink
to rest, but she had hardly done so when she saw a stately lady coming
toward her, surrounded by numbers of attendants. Six maids of honor
carried her train, and she leaned upon the arm of another.

When they came near the fountain a canopy was spread for her, under
which was placed a sofa of cloth-of-gold, and presently a dainty supper
was served, upon a table covered with dishes of gold and crystal, while
the wind in the trees and the falling water of the fountain murmured the
softest music.

Felicia was hidden in the shade, too much astonished by all she saw to
venture to move; but in a few moments the Queen said:

"I fancy I see a shepherdess near that tree; bid her come hither."

So Felicia came forward and saluted the Queen timidly, but with so much
grace that all were surprised.

"What are you doing here, my pretty child?" asked the Queen. "Are you
not afraid of robbers?"

"Ah! madam," said Felicia, "a poor shepherdess who has nothing to lose
does not fear robbers."

"You are not very rich, then?" said the Queen, smiling.

"I am so poor," answered Felicia, "that a pot of pinks and a silver ring
are my only possessions in the world."

"But you have a heart," said the Queen. "What should you say if anybody
wanted to steal that?"

"I do not know what it is like to lose one's heart, madam," she replied;
"but I have always heard that without a heart one cannot live, and if it
is broken one must die; and in spite of my poverty I should be sorry not
to live."

"You are quite right to take care of your heart, pretty one," said the
Queen. "But tell me, have you supped?"

"No, madam," answered Felicia; "my brother ate all the supper there
was."

Then the Queen ordered that a place should be made for her at the table,
and herself loaded Felicia's plate with good things; but she was too
much astonished to be hungry.

"I want to know what you were doing at the fountain so late?" said the
Queen presently.

"I came to fetch a pitcher of water for my pinks, madam," she answered,
stooping to pick up the pitcher which stood beside her; but when she
showed it to the Queen she was amazed to see that it had turned to gold,
all sparkling with great diamonds, and the water, of which it was full,
was more fragrant than the sweetest roses. She was afraid to take it
until the Queen said:

"It is yours, Felicia; go and water your pinks with it, and let it
remind you that the Queen of the Woods is your friend."

The shepherdess threw herself at the Queen's feet, and thanked her
humbly for her gracious words.

"Ah! madam," she cried, "if I might beg you to stay here a moment I
would run and fetch my pot of pinks for you--they could not fall into
better hands."

"Go, Felicia," said the Queen, stroking her cheek softly; "I will wait
here until you come back."

So Felicia took up her pitcher and ran to her little room, but while she
had been away Bruno had gone in and taken the pot of pinks, leaving a
great cabbage in its place. When she saw the unlucky cabbage Felicia was
much distressed, and did not know what to do; but at last she ran back
to the fountain, and, kneeling before the Queen, said:

"Madam, Bruno has stolen my pot of pinks, so I have nothing but my
silver ring; but I beg you to accept it as a proof of my gratitude."

"But if I take your ring, my pretty shepherdess," said the Queen, "you
will have nothing left; and what will you do then?"

"Ah! madam," she answered simply, "if I have your friendship I shall do
very well."

So the Queen took the ring and put it on her finger, and mounted her
chariot, which was made of coral studded with emeralds, and drawn by six
milk-white horses. And Felicia looked after her until the winding of
the forest path hid her from her sight, and then she went back to the
cottage, thinking over all the wonderful things that had happened.

The first thing she did when she reached her room was to throw the
cabbage out of the window.

But she was very much surprised to hear an odd little voice cry out:
"Oh! I am half killed!" and could not tell where it came from, because
cabbages do not generally speak.

As soon as it was light, Felicia, who was very unhappy about her pot of
pinks, went out to look for it, and the first thing she found was the
unfortunate cabbage. She gave it a push with her foot, saying: "What are
you doing here, and how dared you put yourself in the place of my pot of
pinks?"

"If I hadn't been carried," replied the cabbage, "you may be very sure
that I shouldn't have thought of going there."

It made her shiver with fright to hear the cabbage talk, but he went on:

"If you will be good enough to plant me by my comrades again, I can tell
you where your pinks are at this moment--hidden in Bruno's bed!"

Felicia was in despair when she heard this, not knowing how she was
to get them back. But she replanted the cabbage very kindly in his old
place, and, as she finished doing it, she saw Bruno's hen, and said,
catching hold of it:

"Come here, horrid little creature! you shall suffer for all the unkind
things my brother has done to me."

"Ah! shepherdess," said the hen, "don't kill me; I am rather a gossip,
and I can tell you some surprising things that you will like to hear.
Don't imagine that you are the daughter of the poor laborer who brought
you up; your mother was a queen who had six girls already, and the King
threatened that unless she had a son who could inherit his kingdom she
should have her head cut off.

"So when the Queen had another little daughter she was quite frightened,
and agreed with her sister (who was a fairy) to exchange her for the
fairy's little son. Now the Queen had been shut up in a great tower
by the King's orders, and when a great many days went by and still she
heard nothing from the Fairy she made her escape from the window by
means of a rope ladder, taking her little baby with her. After wandering
about until she was half dead with cold and fatigue she reached this
cottage. I was the laborer's wife, and was a good nurse, and the Queen
gave you into my charge, and told me all her misfortunes, and then died
before she had time to say what was to become of you.

"As I never in all my life could keep a secret, I could not help telling
this strange tale to my neighbors, and one day a beautiful lady came
here, and I told it to her also. When I had finished she touched me with
a wand she held in her hand, and instantly I became a hen, and there was
an end of my talking! I was very sad, and my husband, who was out
when it happened, never knew what had become of me. After seeking me
everywhere he believed that I must have been drowned, or eaten up by
wild beasts in the forest. That same lady came here once more, and
commanded that you should be called Felicia, and left the ring and
the pot of pinks to be given to you; and while she was in the house
twenty-five of the King's guards came to search for you, doubtless
meaning to kill you; but she muttered a few words, and immediately they
all turned into cabbages. It was one of them whom you threw out of your
window yesterday.

"I don't know how it was that he could speak--I have never heard either
of them say a word before, nor have I been able to do it myself until
now."

The Princess was greatly astonished at the hen's story, and said kindly:
"I am truly sorry for you, my poor nurse, and wish it was in my power to
restore you to your real form. But we must not despair; it seems to
me, after what you have told me, that something must be going to happen
soon. Just now, however, I must go and look for my pinks, which I love
better than anything in the world."

Bruno had gone out into the forest, never thinking that Felicia
would search in his room for the pinks, and she was delighted by
his unexpected absence, and thought to get them back without further
trouble. But as soon as she entered the room she saw a terrible army
of rats, who were guarding the straw bed; and when she attempted to
approach it they sprang at her, biting and scratching furiously. Quite
terrified, she drew back, crying out: "Oh! my dear pinks, how can you
stay here in such bad company?"

Then she suddenly bethought herself of the pitcher of water, and, hoping
that it might have some magic power, she ran to fetch it, and sprinkled
a few drops over the fierce-looking swarm of rats. In a moment not a
tail or a whisker was to be seen. Each one had made for his hole as fast
as his legs could carry him, so that the Princess could safely take her
pot of pinks. She found them nearly dying for want of water, and hastily
poured all that was left in the pitcher upon them. As she bent over
them, enjoying their delicious scent, a soft voice, that seemed to
rustle among the leaves, said:

"Lovely Felicia, the day has come at last when I may have the happiness
of telling you how even the flowers love you and rejoice in your
beauty."

The Princess, quite overcome by the strangeness of hearing a cabbage,
a hen, and a pink speak, and by the terrible sight of an army of rats,
suddenly became very pale, and fainted away.

At this moment in came Bruno. Working hard in the heat had not improved
his temper, and when he saw that Felicia had succeeded in finding her
pinks he was so angry that he dragged her out into the garden and shut
the door upon her. The fresh air soon made her open her pretty eyes, and
there before her stood the Queen of the Woods, looking as charming as
ever.

"You have a bad brother," she said; "I saw he turned you out. Shall I
punish him for it?"

"Ah! no, madam," she said; "I am not angry with him.

"But supposing he was not your brother, after all, what would you say
then?" asked the Queen.

"Oh! but I think he must be," said Felicia.

"What!" said the Queen, "have you not heard that you are a Princess?"

"I was told so a little while ago, madam, but how could I believe it
without a single proof?"

"Ah! dear child," said the Queen, "the way you speak assures me that, in
spite of your humble upbringing, you are indeed a real princess, and I
can save you from being treated in such a way again."

She was interrupted at this moment by the arrival of a very handsome
young man. He wore a coat of green velvet fastened with emerald clasps,
and had a crown of pinks on his head. He knelt upon one knee and kissed
the Queen's hand.

"Ah!" she cried, "my pink, my dear son, what a happiness to see you
restored to your natural shape by Felicia's aid!" And she embraced him
joyfully. Then, turning to Felicia, she said:

"Charming Princess, I know all the hen told you, but you cannot have
heard that the zephyrs, to whom was entrusted the task of carrying my
son to the tower where the Queen, your mother, so anxiously waited for
him, left him instead in a garden of flowers, while they flew off to
tell your mother. Whereupon a fairy with whom I had quarrelled changed
him into a pink, and I could do nothing to prevent it.

"You can imagine how angry I was, and how I tried to find some means of
undoing the mischief she had done; but there was no help for it. I could
only bring Prince Pink to the place where you were being brought up,
hoping that when you grew up he might love you, and by your care be
restored to his natural form. And you see everything has come right, as
I hoped it would. Your giving me the silver ring was the sign that the
power of the charm was nearly over, and my enemy's last chance was to
frighten you with her army of rats. That she did not succeed in doing;
so now, my dear Felicia, if you will be married to my son with this
silver ring your future happiness is certain. Do you think him handsome
and amiable enough to be willing to marry him?"

"Madam," replied Felicia, blushing, "you overwhelm me with your
kindness. I know that you are my mother's sister, and that by your art
you turned the soldiers who were sent to kill me into cabbages, and my
nurse into a hen, and that you do me only too much honor in proposing
that I shall marry your son. How can I explain to you the cause of my
hesitation? I feel, for the first time in my life, how happy it would
make me to be beloved. Can you indeed give me the Prince's heart?"

"It is yours already, lovely Princess!" he cried, taking her hand in
his; "but for the horrible enchantment which kept me silent I should
have told you long ago how dearly I love you."

This made the Princess very happy, and the Queen, who could not bear
to see her dressed like a poor shepherdess, touched her with her wand,
saying:

"I wish you to be attired as befits your rank and beauty." And
immediately the Princess's cotton dress became a magnificent robe of
silver brocade embroidered with carbuncles, and her soft dark hair was
encircled by a crown of diamonds, from which floated a clear white veil.
With her bright eyes, and the charming color in her cheeks, she was
altogether such a dazzling sight that the Prince could hardly bear it.

"How pretty you are, Felicia!" he cried. "Don't keep me in suspense, I
entreat you; say that you will marry me."

"Ah!" said the Queen, smiling, "I think she will not refuse now."

Just then Bruno, who was going back to his work, came out of the
cottage, and thought he must be dreaming when he saw Felicia; but she
called him very kindly, and begged the Queen to take pity on him.

"What!" she said, "when he was so unkind to you?"

"Ah! madam," said the Princess, "I am so happy that I should like
everybody else to be happy too."

The Queen kissed her, and said: "Well, to please you, let me see what I
can do for this cross Bruno." And with a wave of her wand she turned the
poor little cottage into a splendid palace, full of treasures; only the
two stools and the straw bed remained just as they were, to remind him
of his former poverty. Then the Queen touched Bruno himself, and made
him gentle and polite and grateful, and he thanked her and the Princess
a thousand times. Lastly, the Queen restored the hen and the cabbages
to their natural forms, and left them all very contented. The Prince and
Princess were married as soon as possible with great splendor, and lived
happily ever after.(1)


(1) Fortunee. Par Madame la Comtesse d'Aulnoy.




THE WHITE CAT


Once upon a time there was a king who had three sons, who were all so
clever and brave that he began to be afraid that they would want to
reign over the kingdom before he was dead. Now the King, though he felt
that he was growing old, did not at all wish to give up the government
of his kingdom while he could still manage it very well, so he thought
the best way to live in peace would be to divert the minds of his sons
by promises which he could always get out of when the time came for
keeping them.

So he sent for them all, and, after speaking to them kindly, he added:

"You will quite agree with me, my dear children, that my great age makes
it impossible for me to look after my affairs of state as carefully as
I once did. I begin to fear that this may affect the welfare of my
subjects, therefore I wish that one of you should succeed to my crown;
but in return for such a gift as this it is only right that you should
do something for me. Now, as I think of retiring into the country, it
seems to me that a pretty, lively, faithful little dog would be very
good company for me; so, without any regard for your ages, I promise
that the one who brings me the most beautiful little dog shall succeed
me at once."

The three Princes were greatly surprised by their father's sudden fancy
for a little dog, but as it gave the two younger ones a chance they
would not otherwise have had of being king, and as the eldest was
too polite to make any objection, they accepted the commission with
pleasure. They bade farewell to the King, who gave them presents of
silver and precious stones, and appointed to meet them at the same hour,
in the same place, after a year had passed, to see the little dogs they
had brought for him.

Then they went together to a castle which was about a league from the
city, accompanied by all their particular friends, to whom they gave a
grand banquet, and the three brothers promised to be friends always,
to share whatever good fortune befell them, and not to be parted by
any envy or jealousy; and so they set out, agreeing to meet at the same
castle at the appointed time, to present themselves before the King
together. Each one took a different road, and the two eldest met with
many adventures; but it is about the youngest that you are going to
hear. He was young, and gay, and handsome, and knew everything that a
prince ought to know; and as for his courage, there was simply no end to
it.

Hardly a day passed without his buying several dogs--big and little,
greyhounds, mastiffs, spaniels, and lapdogs. As soon as he had bought a
pretty one he was sure to see a still prettier, and then he had to get
rid of all the others and buy that one, as, being alone, he found it
impossible to take thirty or forty thousand dogs about with him. He
journeyed from day to day, not knowing where he was going, until at
last, just at nightfall, he reached a great, gloomy forest. He did not
know his way, and, to make matters worse, it began to thunder, and
the rain poured down. He took the first path he could find, and after
walking for a long time he fancied he saw a faint light, and began to
hope that he was coming to some cottage where he might find shelter for
the night. At length, guided by the light, he reached the door of the
most splendid castle he could have imagined. This door was of gold
covered with carbuncles, and it was the pure red light which shone from
them that had shown him the way through the forest. The walls were of
the finest porcelain in all the most delicate colors, and the Prince saw
that all the stories he had ever read were pictured upon them; but as he
was terribly wet, and the rain still fell in torrents, he could not stay
to look about any more, but came back to the golden door. There he saw
a deer's foot hanging by a chain of diamonds, and he began to wonder who
could live in this magnificent castle.

"They must feel very secure against robbers," he said to himself. "What
is to hinder anyone from cutting off that chain and digging out those
carbuncles, and making himself rich for life?"

He pulled the deer's foot, and immediately a silver bell sounded and the
door flew open, but the Prince could see nothing but numbers of hands
in the air, each holding a torch. He was so much surprised that he stood
quite still, until he felt himself pushed forward by other hands, so
that, though he was somewhat uneasy, he could not help going on. With
his hand on his sword, to be prepared for whatever might happen, he
entered a hall paved with lapis-lazuli, while two lovely voices sang:


     "The hands you see floating above
       Will swiftly your bidding obey;
     If your heart dreads not conquering Love,
       In this place you may fearlessly stay."


The Prince could not believe that any danger threatened him when he was
welcomed in this way, so, guided by the mysterious hands, he went toward
a door of coral, which opened of its own accord, and he found himself
in a vast hall of mother-of-pearl, out of which opened a number of other
rooms, glittering with thousands of lights, and full of such beautiful
pictures and precious things that the Prince felt quite bewildered.
After passing through sixty rooms the hands that conducted him stopped,
and the Prince saw a most comfortable-looking arm-chair drawn up close
to the chimney-corner; at the same moment the fire lighted itself, and
the pretty, soft, clever hands took off the Prince's wet, muddy clothes,
and presented him with fresh ones made of the richest stuffs, all
embroidered with gold and emeralds. He could not help admiring
everything he saw, and the deft way in which the hands waited on him,
though they sometimes appeared so suddenly that they made him jump.

When he was quite ready--and I can assure you that he looked very
different from the wet and weary Prince who had stood outside in the
rain, and pulled the deer's foot--the hands led him to a splendid room,
upon the walls of which were painted the histories of Puss in Boots and
a number of other famous cats. The table was laid for supper with
two golden plates, and golden spoons and forks, and the sideboard was
covered with dishes and glasses of crystal set with precious stones. The
Prince was wondering who the second place could be for, when suddenly
in came about a dozen cats carrying guitars and rolls of music, who took
their places at one end of the room, and under the direction of a cat
who beat time with a roll of paper began to mew in every imaginable key,
and to draw their claws across the strings of the guitars, making the
strangest kind of music that could be heard. The Prince hastily stopped
up his ears, but even then the sight of these comical musicians sent him
into fits of laughter.

"What funny thing shall I see next?" he said to himself, and instantly
the door opened, and in came a tiny figure covered by a long black veil.
It was conducted by two cats wearing black mantles and carrying swords,
and a large party of cats followed, who brought in cages full of rats
and mice.

The Prince was so much astonished that he thought he must be dreaming,
but the little figure came up to him and threw back its veil, and he saw
that it was the loveliest little white cat it is possible to imagine.
She looked very young and very sad, and in a sweet little voice that
went straight to his heart she said to the Prince:

"King's son, you are welcome; the Queen of the Cats is glad to see you."

"Lady Cat," replied the Prince, "I thank you for receiving me so kindly,
but surely you are no ordinary pussy-cat? Indeed, the way you speak and
the magnificence of your castle prove it plainly."

"King's son," said the White Cat, "I beg you to spare me these
compliments, for I am not used to them. But now," she added, "let supper
be served, and let the musicians be silent, as the Prince does not
understand what they are saying."

So the mysterious hands began to bring in the supper, and first they put
on the table two dishes, one containing stewed pigeons and the other a
fricassee of fat mice. The sight of the latter made the Prince feel as
if he could not enjoy his supper at all; but the White Cat, seeing this,
assured him that the dishes intended for him were prepared in a separate
kitchen, and he might be quite certain that they contained neither rats
nor mice; and the Prince felt so sure that she would not deceive him
that he had no more hesitation in beginning. Presently he noticed
that on the little paw that was next him the White Cat wore a bracelet
containing a portrait, and he begged to be allowed to look at it. To his
great surprise he found it represented an extremely handsome young man,
who was so like himself that it might have been his own portrait! The
White Cat sighed as he looked at it, and seemed sadder than ever, and
the Prince dared not ask any questions for fear of displeasing her; so
he began to talk about other things, and found that she was interested
in all the subjects he cared for himself, and seemed to know quite well
what was going on in the world. After supper they went into another
room, which was fitted up as a theatre, and the cats acted and danced
for their amusement, and then the White Cat said good-night to him, and
the hands conducted him into a room he had not seen before, hung with
tapestry worked with butterflies' wings of every color; there were
mirrors that reached from the ceiling to the floor, and a little white
bed with curtains of gauze tied up with ribbons. The Prince went to bed
in silence, as he did not quite know how to begin a conversation with
the hands that waited on him, and in the morning he was awakened by
a noise and confusion outside of his window, and the hands came and
quickly dressed him in hunting costume. When he looked out all the cats
were assembled in the courtyard, some leading greyhounds, some blowing
horns, for the White Cat was going out hunting. The hands led a wooden
horse up to the Prince, and seemed to expect him to mount it, at which
he was very indignant; but it was no use for him to object, for he
speedily found himself upon its back, and it pranced gaily off with him.

The White Cat herself was riding a monkey, which climbed even up to
the eagles' nests when she had a fancy for the young eaglets. Never was
there a pleasanter hunting party, and when they returned to the castle
the Prince and the White Cat supped together as before, but when they
had finished she offered him a crystal goblet, which must have contained
a magic draught, for, as soon as he had swallowed its contents, he
forgot everything, even the little dog that he was seeking for the King,
and only thought how happy he was to be with the White Cat! And so the
days passed, in every kind of amusement, until the year was nearly gone.
The Prince had forgotten all about meeting his brothers: he did not even
know what country he belonged to; but the White Cat knew when he ought
to go back, and one day she said to him:

"Do you know that you have only three days left to look for the little
dog for your father, and your brothers have found lovely ones?"

Then the Prince suddenly recovered his memory, and cried:

"What can have made me forget such an important thing? My whole fortune
depends upon it; and even if I could in such a short time find a dog
pretty enough to gain me a kingdom, where should I find a horse who
would carry me all that way in three days?" And he began to be very
vexed. But the White Cat said to him: "King's son, do not trouble
yourself; I am your friend, and will make everything easy for you. You
can still stay here for a day, as the good wooden horse can take you to
your country in twelve hours."

"I thank you, beautiful Cat," said the Prince; "but what good will it do
me to get back if I have not a dog to take to my father?"

"See here," answered the White Cat, holding up an acorn; "there is a
prettier one in this than in the Dogstar!"

"Oh! White Cat dear," said the Prince, "how unkind you are to laugh at
me now!"

"Only listen," she said, holding the acorn to his ear.

And inside it he distinctly heard a tiny voice say: "Bow-wow!"

The Prince was delighted, for a dog that can be shut up in an acorn must
be very small indeed. He wanted to take it out and look at it, but the
White Cat said it would be better not to open the acorn till he was
before the King, in case the tiny dog should be cold on the journey. He
thanked her a thousand times, and said good-by quite sadly when the time
came for him to set out.

"The days have passed so quickly with you," he said, "I only wish I
could take you with me now."

But the White Cat shook her head and sighed deeply in answer.

After all the Prince was the first to arrive at the castle where he had
agreed to meet his brothers, but they came soon after, and stared in
amazement when they saw the wooden horse in the courtyard jumping like a
hunter.

The Prince met them joyfully, and they began to tell him all their
adventures; but he managed to hide from them what he had been doing, and
even led them to think that a turnspit dog which he had with him was the
one he was bringing for the King. Fond as they all were of one another,
the two eldest could not help being glad to think that their dogs
certainly had a better chance. The next morning they started in the same
chariot. The elder brothers carried in baskets two such tiny, fragile
dogs that they hardly dared to touch them. As for the turnspit, he ran
after the chariot, and got so covered with mud that one could hardly see
what he was like at all. When they reached the palace everyone crowded
round to welcome them as they went into the King's great hall; and when
the two brothers presented their little dogs nobody could decide which
was the prettier. They were already arranging between themselves to
share the kingdom equally, when the youngest stepped forward, drawing
from his pocket the acorn the White Cat had given him. He opened it
quickly, and there upon a white cushion they saw a dog so small that it
could easily have been put through a ring. The Prince laid it upon the
ground, and it got up at once and began to dance. The King did not know
what to say, for it was impossible that anything could be prettier than
this little creature. Nevertheless, as he was in no hurry to part with
his crown, he told his sons that, as they had been so successful the
first time, he would ask them to go once again, and seek by land and sea
for a piece of muslin so fine that it could be drawn through the eye of
a needle. The brothers were not very willing to set out again, but
the two eldest consented because it gave them another chance, and they
started as before. The youngest again mounted the wooden horse, and rode
back at full speed to his beloved White Cat. Every door of the castle
stood wide open, and every window and turret was illuminated, so it
looked more wonderful than before. The hands hastened to meet him, and
led the wooden horse off to the stable, while he hurried in to find the
White Cat. She was asleep in a little basket on a white satin cushion,
but she very soon started up when she heard the Prince, and was
overjoyed at seeing him once more.

"How could I hope that you would come back to me King's son?" she said.
And then he stroked and petted her, and told her of his successful
journey, and how he had come back to ask her help, as he believed that
it was impossible to find what the King demanded. The White Cat looked
serious, and said she must think what was to be done, but that, luckily,
there were some cats in the castle who could spin very well, and if
anybody could manage it they could, and she would set them the task
herself.

And then the hands appeared carrying torches, and conducted the Prince
and the White Cat to a long gallery which overlooked the river, from
the windows of which they saw a magnificent display of fireworks of all
sorts; after which they had supper, which the Prince liked even better
than the fireworks, for it was very late, and he was hungry after his
long ride. And so the days passed quickly as before; it was impossible
to feel dull with the White Cat, and she had quite a talent for
inventing new amusements--indeed, she was cleverer than a cat has any
right to be. But when the Prince asked her how it was that she was so
wise, she only said:

"King's son, do not ask me; guess what you please. I may not tell you
anything."

The Prince was so happy that he did not trouble himself at all about the
time, but presently the White Cat told him that the year was gone, and
that he need not be at all anxious about the piece of muslin, as they
had made it very well.

"This time," she added, "I can give you a suitable escort"; and on
looking out into the courtyard the Prince saw a superb chariot of
burnished gold, enameled in flame color with a thousand different
devices. It was drawn by twelve snow-white horses, harnessed four
abreast; their trappings were flame-colored velvet, embroidered with
diamonds. A hundred chariots followed, each drawn by eight horses,
and filled with officers in splendid uniforms, and a thousand guards
surrounded the procession. "Go!" said the White Cat, "and when you
appear before the King in such state he surely will not refuse you the
crown which you deserve. Take this walnut, but do not open it until you
are before him, then you will find in it the piece of stuff you asked me
for."

"Lovely Blanchette," said the Prince, "how can I thank you properly for
all your kindness to me? Only tell me that you wish it, and I will
give up for ever all thought of being king, and will stay here with you
always."

"King's son," she replied, "it shows the goodness of your heart that you
should care so much for a little white cat, who is good for nothing but
to catch mice; but you must not stay."

So the Prince kissed her little paw and set out. You can imagine how
fast he traveled when I tell you that they reached the King's palace in
just half the time it had taken the wooden horse to get there. This time
the Prince was so late that he did not try to meet his brothers at their
castle, so they thought he could not be coming, and were rather glad of
it, and displayed their pieces of muslin to the King proudly, feeling
sure of success. And indeed the stuff was very fine, and would go
through the eye of a very large needle; but the King, who was only too
glad to make a difficulty, sent for a particular needle, which was kept
among the Crown jewels, and had such a small eye that everybody saw at
once that it was impossible that the muslin should pass through it. The
Princes were angry, and were beginning to complain that it was a trick,
when suddenly the trumpets sounded and the youngest Prince came in. His
father and brothers were quite astonished at his magnificence, and after
he had greeted them he took the walnut from his pocket and opened it,
fully expecting to find the piece of muslin, but instead there was only
a hazel-nut. He cracked it, and there lay a cherry-stone. Everybody was
looking on, and the King was chuckling to himself at the idea of finding
the piece of muslin in a nutshell.

However, the Prince cracked the cherry-stone, but everyone laughed when
he saw it contained only its own kernel. He opened that and found a
grain of wheat, and in that was a millet seed. Then he himself began to
wonder, and muttered softly:

"White Cat, White Cat, are you making fun of me?"

In an instant he felt a cat's claw give his hand quite a sharp scratch,
and hoping that it was meant as an encouragement he opened the millet
seed, and drew out of it a piece of muslin four hundred ells long, woven
with the loveliest colors and most wonderful patterns; and when the
needle was brought it went through the eye six times with the greatest
ease! The King turned pale, and the other Princes stood silent and
sorrowful, for nobody could deny that this was the most marvelous piece
of muslin that was to be found in the world.

Presently the King turned to his sons, and said, with a deep sigh:

"Nothing could console me more in my old age than to realize your
willingness to gratify my wishes. Go then once more, and whoever at the
end of a year can bring back the loveliest princess shall be married
to her, and shall, without further delay, receive the crown, for my
successor must certainly be married." The Prince considered that he had
earned the kingdom fairly twice over but still he was too well bred
to argue about it, so he just went back to his gorgeous chariot, and,
surrounded by his escort, returned to the White Cat faster than he had
come. This time she was expecting him, the path was strewn with flowers,
and a thousand braziers were burning scented woods which perfumed the
air. Seated in a gallery from which she could see his arrival, the White
Cat waited for him. "Well, King's son," she said, "here you are once
more, without a crown." "Madam," said he, "thanks to your generosity I
have earned one twice over; but the fact is that my father is so loth to
part with it that it would be no pleasure to me to take it."

"Never mind," she answered, "it's just as well to try and deserve it. As
you must take back a lovely princess with you next time I will be on
the look-out for one for you. In the meantime let us enjoy ourselves;
to-night I have ordered a battle between my cats and the river rats on
purpose to amuse you." So this year slipped away even more pleasantly
than the preceding ones. Sometimes the Prince could not help asking the
White Cat how it was she could talk.

"Perhaps you are a fairy," he said. "Or has some enchanter changed you
into a cat?"

But she only gave him answers that told him nothing. Days go by so
quickly when one is very happy that it is certain the Prince would never
have thought of its being time to go back, when one evening as they sat
together the White Cat said to him that if he wanted to take a lovely
princess home with him the next day he must be prepared to do what she
told him.

"Take this sword," she said, "and cut off my head!"

"I!" cried the Prince, "I cut off your head! Blanchette darling, how
could I do it?"

"I entreat you to do as I tell you, King's son," she replied.

The tears came into the Prince's eyes as he begged her to ask him
anything but that--to set him any task she pleased as a proof of his
devotion, but to spare him the grief of killing his dear Pussy. But
nothing he could say altered her determination, and at last he drew his
sword, and desperately, with a trembling hand, cut off the little white
head. But imagine his astonishment and delight when suddenly a lovely
princess stood before him, and, while he was still speechless with
amazement, the door opened and a goodly company of knights and ladies
entered, each carrying a cat's skin! They hastened with every sign of
joy to the Princess, kissing her hand and congratulating her on being
once more restored to her natural shape. She received them graciously,
but after a few minutes begged that they would leave her alone with the
Prince, to whom she said:

"You see, Prince, that you were right in supposing me to be no ordinary
cat. My father reigned over six kingdoms. The Queen, my mother, whom he
loved dearly, had a passion for traveling and exploring, and when I
was only a few weeks old she obtained his permission to visit a certain
mountain of which she had heard many marvelous tales, and set out,
taking with her a number of her attendants. On the way they had to pass
near an old castle belonging to the fairies. Nobody had ever been into
it, but it was reported to be full of the most wonderful things, and
my mother remembered to have heard that the fairies had in their garden
such fruits as were to be seen and tasted nowhere else. She began to
wish to try them for herself, and turned her steps in the direction of
the garden. On arriving at the door, which blazed with gold and jewels,
she ordered her servants to knock loudly, but it was useless; it seemed
as if all the inhabitants of the castle must be asleep or dead. Now the
more difficult it became to obtain the fruit, the more the Queen was
determined that have it she would. So she ordered that they should bring
ladders, and get over the wall into the garden; but though the wall did
not look very high, and they tied the ladders together to make them very
long, it was quite impossible to get to the top.

"The Queen was in despair, but as night was coming on she ordered
that they should encamp just where they were, and went to bed herself,
feeling quite ill, she was so disappointed. In the middle of the night
she was suddenly awakened, and saw to her surprise a tiny, ugly old
woman seated by her bedside, who said to her:

"'I must say that we consider it somewhat troublesome of your Majesty to
insist upon tasting our fruit; but to save you annoyance, my sisters
and I will consent to give you as much as you can carry away, on one
condition--that is, that you shall give us your little daughter to bring
up as our own.'

"'Ah! my dear madam,' cried the Queen, 'is there nothing else that you
will take for the fruit? I will give you my kingdoms willingly.'

"'No,' replied the old fairy, 'we will have nothing but your little
daughter. She shall be as happy as the day is long, and we will give her
everything that is worth having in fairy-land, but you must not see her
again until she is married.'

"'Though it is a hard condition,' said the Queen, 'I consent, for I
shall certainly die if I do not taste the fruit, and so I should lose my
little daughter either way.'

"So the old fairy led her into the castle, and, though it was still the
middle of the night, the Queen could see plainly that it was far more
beautiful than she had been told, which you can easily believe, Prince,"
said the White Cat, "when I tell you that it was this castle that we are
now in. 'Will you gather the fruit yourself, Queen?' said the old fairy,
'or shall I call it to come to you?'

"'I beg you to let me see it come when it is called,' cried the Queen;
'that will be something quite new.' The old fairy whistled twice, then
she cried:

"'Apricots, peaches, nectarines, cherries, plums, pears, melons, grapes,
apples, oranges, lemons, gooseberries, strawberries, raspberries, come!'

"And in an instant they came tumbling in one over another, and yet they
were neither dusty nor spoilt, and the Queen found them quite as good as
she had fancied them. You see they grew upon fairy trees.

"The old fairy gave her golden baskets in which to take the fruit away,
and it was as much as four hundred mules could carry. Then she reminded
the Queen of her agreement, and led her back to the camp, and next
morning she went back to her kingdom, but before she had gone very far
she began to repent of her bargain, and when the King came out to meet
her she looked so sad that he guessed that something had happened, and
asked what was the matter. At first the Queen was afraid to tell him,
but when, as soon as they reached the palace, five frightful little
dwarfs were sent by the fairies to fetch me, she was obliged to confess
what she had promised. The King was very angry, and had the Queen and
myself shut up in a great tower and safely guarded, and drove the little
dwarfs out of his kingdom; but the fairies sent a great dragon who ate
up all the people he met, and whose breath burnt up everything as he
passed through the country; and at last, after trying in vain to rid
himself of this monster, the King, to save his subjects, was obliged to
consent that I should be given up to the fairies. This time they came
themselves to fetch me, in a chariot of pearl drawn by sea-horses,
followed by the dragon, who was led with chains of diamonds. My cradle
was placed between the old fairies, who loaded me with caresses, and
away we whirled through the air to a tower which they had built on
purpose for me. There I grew up surrounded with everything that was
beautiful and rare, and learning everything that is ever taught to a
princess, but without any companions but a parrot and a little dog, who
could both talk; and receiving every day a visit from one of the old
fairies, who came mounted upon the dragon. One day, however, as I sat at
my window I saw a handsome young prince, who seemed to have been hunting
in the forest which surrounded my prison, and who was standing and
looking up at me. When he saw that I observed him he saluted me with
great deference. You can imagine that I was delighted to have some one
new to talk to, and in spite of the height of my window our conversation
was prolonged till night fell, then my prince reluctantly bade me
farewell. But after that he came again many times and at last I
consented to marry him, but the question was how was I to escape from my
tower. The fairies always supplied me with flax for my spinning, and by
great diligence I made enough cord for a ladder that would reach to
the foot of the tower; but, alas! just as my prince was helping me to
descend it, the crossest and ugliest of the old fairies flew in. Before
he had time to defend himself my unhappy lover was swallowed up by the
dragon. As for me, the fairies, furious at having their plans defeated,
for they intended me to marry the king of the dwarfs, and I utterly
refused, changed me into a white cat. When they brought me here I found
all the lords and ladies of my father's court awaiting me under the same
enchantment, while the people of lesser rank had been made invisible,
all but their hands.

"As they laid me under the enchantment the fairies told me all my
history, for until then I had quite believed that I was their child, and
warned me that my only chance of regaining my natural form was to win
the love of a prince who resembled in every way my unfortunate lover.

"And you have won it, lovely Princess," interrupted the Prince.

"You are indeed wonderfully like him," resumed the Princess--"in voice,
in features, and everything; and if you really love me all my troubles
will be at an end."

"And mine too," cried the Prince, throwing himself at her feet, "if you
will consent to marry me."

"I love you already better than anyone in the world," she said; "but
now it is time to go back to your father, and we shall hear what he says
about it."

So the Prince gave her his hand and led her out, and they mounted the
chariot together; it was even more splendid than before, and so was the
whole company. Even the horses' shoes were of rubies with diamond nails,
and I suppose that is the first time such a thing was ever seen.

As the Princess was as kind and clever as she was beautiful, you may
imagine what a delightful journey the Prince found it, for everything
the Princess said seemed to him quite charming.

When they came near the castle where the brothers were to meet, the
Princess got into a chair carried by four of the guards; it was hewn out
of one splendid crystal, and had silken curtains, which she drew round
her that she might not be seen.

The Prince saw his brothers walking upon the terrace, each with a lovely
princess, and they came to meet him, asking if he had also found a wife.
He said that he had found something much rarer--a white cat! At which
they laughed very much, and asked him if he was afraid of being eaten up
by mice in the palace. And then they set out together for the town. Each
prince and princess rode in a splendid carriage; the horses were decked
with plumes of feathers, and glittered with gold. After them came the
youngest prince, and last of all the crystal chair, at which everybody
looked with admiration and curiosity. When the courtiers saw them coming
they hastened to tell the King.

"Are the ladies beautiful?" he asked anxiously.

And when they answered that nobody had ever before seen such lovely
princesses he seemed quite annoyed.

However, he received them graciously, but found it impossible to choose
between them.

Then turning to his youngest son he said:

"Have you come back alone, after all?"

"Your Majesty," replied the Prince, "will find in that crystal chair a
little white cat, which has such soft paws, and mews so prettily, that I
am sure you will be charmed with it."

The King smiled, and went to draw back the curtains himself, but at a
touch from the Princess the crystal shivered into a thousand splinters,
and there she stood in all her beauty; her fair hair floated over her
shoulders and was crowned with flowers, and her softly falling robe was
of the purest white. She saluted the King gracefully, while a murmur of
admiration rose from all around.

"Sire," she said, "I am not come to deprive you of the throne you fill
so worthily. I have already six kingdoms, permit me to bestow one upon
you, and upon each of your sons. I ask nothing but your friendship, and
your consent to my marriage with your youngest son; we shall still have
three kingdoms left for ourselves."

The King and all the courtiers could not conceal their joy and
astonishment, and the marriage of the three Princes was celebrated at
once. The festivities lasted several months, and then each king and
queen departed to their own kingdom and lived happily ever after.(1)


(1) La Chatte blanche. Par Madame la Comtesse d'Aulnoy.




THE WATER-LILY. THE GOLD-SPINNERS


Once upon a time, in a large forest, there lived an old woman and
three maidens. They were all three beautiful, but the youngest was the
fairest. Their hut was quite hidden by trees, and none saw their beauty
but the sun by day, and the moon by night, and the eyes of the stars.
The old woman kept the girls hard at work, from morning till night,
spinning gold flax into yarn, and when one distaff was empty another was
given them, so they had no rest. The thread had to be fine and even, and
when done was locked up in a secret chamber by the old woman, who twice
or thrice every summer went a journey. Before she went she gave out work
for each day of her absence, and always returned in the night, so that
the girls never saw what she brought back with her, neither would she
tell them whence the gold flax came, nor what it was to be used for.

Now, when the time came round for the old woman to set out on one of
these journeys, she gave each maiden work for six days, with the usual
warning: "Children, don't let your eyes wander, and on no account speak
to a man, for, if you do, your thread will lose its brightness, and
misfortunes of all kinds will follow." They laughed at this oft-repeated
caution, saying to each other: "How can our gold thread lose its
brightness, and have we any chance of speaking to a man?"

On the third day after the old woman's departure a young prince, hunting
in the forest, got separated from his companions, and completely lost.
Weary of seeking his way, he flung himself down under a tree, leaving
his horse to browse at will, and fell asleep.

The sun had set when he awoke and began once more to try and find his
way out of the forest. At last he perceived a narrow foot-path, which he
eagerly followed and found that it led him to a small hut. The maidens,
who were sitting at the door of their hut for coolness, saw him
approaching, and the two elder were much alarmed, for they remembered
the old woman's warning; but the youngest said: "Never before have I
seen anyone like him; let me have one look." They entreated her to come
in, but, seeing that she would not, left her, and the Prince, coming up,
courteously greeted the maiden, and told her he had lost his way in the
forest and was both hungry and weary. She set food before him, and
was so delighted with his conversation that she forgot the old woman's
caution, and lingered for hours. In the meantime the Prince's companions
sought him far and wide, but to no purpose, so they sent two messengers
to tell the sad news to the King, who immediately ordered a regiment of
cavalry and one of infantry to go and look for him.

After three days' search, they found the hut. The Prince was still
sitting by the door and had been so happy in the maiden's company that
the time had seemed like a single hour. Before leaving he promised to
return and fetch her to his father's court, where he would make her his
bride. When he had gone, she sat down to her wheel to make up for
lost time, but was dismayed to find that her thread had lost all
its brightness. Her heart beat fast and she wept bitterly, for she
remembered the old woman's warning and knew not what misfortune might
now befall her.

The old woman returned in the night and knew by the tarnished thread
what had happened in her absence. She was furiously angry and told
the maiden that she had brought down misery both on herself and on the
Prince. The maiden could not rest for thinking of this. At last she
could bear it no longer, and resolved to seek help from the Prince.

As a child she had learned to understand the speech of birds, and this
was now of great use to her, for, seeing a raven pluming itself on a
pine bough, she cried softly to it: "Dear bird, cleverest of all birds,
as well as swiftest on wing, wilt thou help me?" "How can I help
thee?" asked the raven. She answered: "Fly away, until thou comest to a
splendid town, where stands a king's palace; seek out the king's son
and tell him that a great misfortune has befallen me." Then she told the
raven how her thread had lost its brightness, how terribly angry the old
woman was, and how she feared some great disaster. The raven promised
faithfully to do her bidding, and, spreading its wings, flew away. The
maiden now went home and worked hard all day at winding up the yarn her
elder sisters had spun, for the old woman would let her spin no longer.
Toward evening she heard the raven's "craa, craa," from the pine tree
and eagerly hastened thither to hear the answer.

By great good fortune the raven had found a wind wizard's son in the
palace garden, who understood the speech of birds, and to him he had
entrusted the message. When the Prince heard it, he was very sorrowful,
and took counsel with his friends how to free the maiden. Then he said
to the wind wizard's son: "Beg the raven to fly quickly back to the
maiden and tell her to be ready on the ninth night, for then will I come
and fetch her away." The wind wizard's son did this, and the raven flew
so swiftly that it reached the hut that same evening. The maiden thanked
the bird heartily and went home, telling no one what she had heard.

As the ninth night drew near she became very unhappy, for she feared
lest some terrible mischance should arise and ruin all. On this night
she crept quietly out of the house and waited trembling at some little
distance from the hut. Presently she heard the muffled tramp of horses,
and soon the armed troop appeared, led by the Prince, who had prudently
marked all the trees beforehand, in order to know the way. When he saw
the maiden he sprang from his horse, lifted her into the saddle, and
then, mounting behind, rode homeward. The moon shone so brightly that
they had no difficulty in seeing the marked trees.

By and by the coming of dawn loosened the tongues of all the birds,
and, had the Prince only known what they were saying, or the maiden
been listening, they might have been spared much sorrow, but they were
thinking only of each other, and when they came out of the forest the
sun was high in the heavens.

Next morning, when the youngest girl did not come to her work, the old
woman asked where she was. The sisters pretended not to know, but the
old woman easily guessed what had happened, and, as she was in reality
a wicked witch, determined to punish the fugitives. Accordingly, she
collected nine different kinds of enchanters' nightshade, added some
salt, which she first bewitched, and, doing all up in a cloth into the
shape of a fluffy ball, sent it after them on the wings of the wind,
saying:

  "Whirlwind!--mother of the wind!
  Lend thy aid 'gainst her who sinned!
  Carry with thee this magic ball.
  Cast her from his arms for ever,
  Bury her in the rippling river."


At midday the Prince and his men came to a deep river, spanned by so
narrow a bridge that only one rider could cross at a time. The horse on
which the Prince and the maiden were riding had just reached the middle
when the magic ball flew by. The horse in its fright suddenly reared,
and before anyone could stop it flung the maiden into the swift current
below. The Prince tried to jump in after her, but his men held him back,
and in spite of his struggles led him home, where for six weeks he shut
himself up in a secret chamber, and would neither eat nor drink, so
great was his grief. At last he became so ill his life was despaired of,
and in great alarm the King caused all the wizards of his country to be
summoned. But none could cure him. At last the wind wizard's son said to
the King: "Send for the old wizard from Finland he knows more than all
the wizards of your kingdom put together." A messenger was at once sent
to Finland, and a week later the old wizard himself arrived on the wings
of the wind. "Honored King," said the wizard, "the wind has blown this
illness upon your son, and a magic ball has snatched away his beloved.
This it is which makes him grieve so constantly. Let the wind blow upon
him that it may blow away his sorrow." Then the King made his son go
out into the wind, and he gradually recovered and told his father all.
"Forget the maiden," said the King, "and take another bride"; but the
Prince said he could never love another.

A year afterward he came suddenly upon the bridge where his beloved met
her death. As he recalled the misfortune he wept bitterly, and would
have given all he possessed to have her once more alive. In the midst
of his grief he thought he heard a voice singing, and looked round, but
could see no one. Then he heard the voice again, and it said:

"Alas! bewitched and all forsaken,  'Tis I must lie for ever here!
My beloved no thought has taken  To free his bride, that was so dear."

He was greatly astonished, sprang from his horse, and looked everywhere
to see if no one were hidden under the bridge; but no one was there.
Then he noticed a yellow water-lily floating on the surface of the
water, half hidden by its broad leaves; but flowers do not sing, and
in great surprise he waited, hoping to hear more. Then again the voice
sang:

     "Alas! bewitched and all forsaken,
       'Tis I must lie for ever here!
     My beloved no thought has taken
       To free his bride, that was so dear."

The Prince suddenly remembered the gold-spinners, and said to himself:
"If I ride thither, who knows but that they could explain this to me?"
He at once rode to the hut, and found the two maidens at the fountain.
He told them what had befallen their sister the year before, and how he
had twice heard a strange song, but yet could see no singer. They said
that the yellow water-lily could be none other than their sister, who
was not dead, but transformed by the magic ball. Before he went to bed,
the eldest made a cake of magic herbs, which she gave him to eat. In the
night he dreamed that he was living in the forest and could understand
all that the birds said to each other. Next morning he told this to the
maidens, and they said that the charmed cake had caused it, and advised
him to listen well to the birds, and see what they could tell him, and
when he had recovered his bride they begged him to return and deliver
them from their wretched bondage.

Having promised this, he joyfully returned home, and as he was riding
through the forest he could perfectly understand all that the birds
said. He heard a thrush say to a magpie: "How stupid men are! they
cannot understand the simplest thing. It is now quite a year since the
maiden was transformed into a water-lily, and, though she sings so sadly
that anyone going over the bridge must hear her, yet no one comes to
her aid. Her former bridegroom rode over it a few days ago and heard her
singing, but was no wiser than the rest."

"And he is to blame for all her misfortunes," added the magpie. "If he
heeds only the words of men she will remain a flower for ever. She
were soon delivered were the matter only laid before the old wizard of
Finland."

After hearing this, the Prince wondered how he could get a message
conveyed to Finland. He heard one swallow say to another: "Come, let us
fly to Finland; we can build better nests there."

"Stop, kind friends!" cried the Prince. "Will you do something for me?"
The birds consented, and he said: "Take a thousand greetings from me
to the wizard of Finland, and ask him how I may restore a maiden
transformed into a flower to her own form."

The swallows flew away, and the Prince rode on to the bridge. There he
waited, hoping to hear the song. But he heard nothing but the rushing of
the water and the moaning of the wind, and, disappointed, rode home.

Shortly after, he was sitting in the garden, thinking that the swallows
must have forgotten his message, when he saw an eagle flying above him.
The bird gradually descended until it perched on a tree close to the
Prince and said: "The wizard of Finland greets thee and bids me say that
thou mayest free the maiden thus: Go to the river and smear thyself all
over with mud; then say: 'From a man into a crab,' and thou wilt become
a crab. Plunge boldly into the water, swim as close as thou canst to the
water-lily's roots, and loosen them from the mud and reeds. This done,
fasten thy claws into the roots and rise with them to the surface. Let
the water flow all over the flower, and drift with the current until
thou comest to a mountain ash tree on the left bank. There is near it
a large stone. Stop there and say: 'From a crab into a man, from a
water-lily into a maiden,' and ye both will be restored to your own
forms."

Full of doubt and fear, the Prince let some time pass before he was bold
enough to attempt to rescue the maiden. Then a crow said to him: "Why
dost thou hesitate? The old wizard has not told thee wrong, neither have
the birds deceived thee; hasten and dry the maiden's tears."

"Nothing worse than death can befall me," thought the Prince, "and death
is better than endless sorrow." So he mounted his horse and went to
the bridge. Again he heard the water-lily's lament, and, hesitating no
longer, smeared himself all over with mud, and, saying: "From a man into
a crab," plunged into the river. For one moment the water hissed in
his ears, and then all was silent. He swam up to the plant and began
to loosen its roots, but so firmly were they fixed in the mud and reeds
that this took him a long time. He then grasped them and rose to the
surface, letting the water flow over the flower. The current carried
them down the stream, but nowhere could he see the mountain ash. At last
he saw it, and close by the large stone. Here he stopped and said: "From
a crab into a man, from a water-lily into a maiden," and to his delight
found himself once more a prince, and the maiden was by his side. She
was ten times more beautiful than before, and wore a magnificent pale
yellow robe, sparkling with jewels. She thanked him for having freed her
from the cruel witch's power, and willingly consented to marry him.

But when they came to the bridge where he had left his horse it was
nowhere to be seen, for, though the Prince thought he had been a crab
only a few hours, he had in reality been under the water for more than
ten days. While they were wondering how they should reach his father's
court, they saw a splendid coach driven by six gaily caparisoned horses
coming along the bank. In this they drove to the palace. The King and
Queen were at church, weeping for their son, whom they had long mourned
for dead. Great was their delight and astonishment when the Prince
entered, leading the beautiful maiden by the hand. The wedding was at
once celebrated and there was feasting and merry-making throughout the
kingdom for six weeks.

Some time afterward the Prince and his bride were sitting in the garden,
when a crow said to them: "Ungrateful creatures! Have you forgotten the
two poor maidens who helped you in your distress? Must they spin gold
flax for ever? Have no pity on the old witch. The three maidens are
princesses, whom she stole away when they were children together, with
all the silver utensils, which she turned into gold flax. Poison were
her fittest punishment."

The Prince was ashamed of having forgotten his promise and set out at
once, and by great good fortune reached the hut when the old woman was
away. The maidens had dreamed that he was coming, and were ready to go
with him, but first they made a cake in which they put poison, and
left it on a table where the old woman was likely to see it when she
returned. She _did_ see it, and thought it looked so tempting that she
greedily ate it up and at once died.

In the secret chamber were found fifty wagon-loads of gold flax, and as
much more was discovered buried. The hut was razed to the ground, and
the Prince and his bride and her two sisters lived happily ever after.




THE TERRIBLE HEAD


Once upon a time there was a king whose only child was a girl. Now the
King had been very anxious to have a son, or at least a grandson, to
come after him, but he was told by a prophet whom he consulted that his
own daughter's son should kill him. This news terrified him so much that
he determined never to let his daughter be married, for he thought it
was better to have no grandson at all than to be killed by his grandson.
He therefore called his workmen together, and bade them dig a deep round
hole in the earth, and then he had a prison of brass built in the hole,
and then, when it was finished, he locked up his daughter. No man ever
saw her, and she never saw even the fields and the sea, but only the sky
and the sun, for there was a wide open window in the roof of the house
of brass. So the Princess would sit looking up at the sky, and watching
the clouds float across, and wondering whether she should ever get out
of her prison. Now one day it seemed to her that the sky opened above
her, and a great shower of shining gold fell through the window in the
roof, and lay glittering in her room. Not very long after, the Princess
had a baby, a little boy, but when the King her father heard of it he
was very angry and afraid, for now the child was born that should be his
death. Yet, cowardly as he was, he had not quite the heart to kill
the Princess and her baby outright, but he had them put in a huge
brass-bound chest and thrust out to sea, that they might either be
drowned or starved, or perhaps come to a country where they would be out
of his way.

So the Princess and the baby floated and drifted in the chest on the sea
all day and night, but the baby was not afraid of the waves nor of the
wind, for he did not know that they could hurt him, and he slept quite
soundly. And the Princess sang a song over him, and this was her song:

  "Child, my child, how sound you sleep!
  Though your mother's care is deep,
  You can lie with heart at rest
  In the narrow brass-bound chest;
  In the starless night and drear
  You can sleep, and never hear
  Billows breaking, and the cry
  Of the night-wind wandering by;
  In soft purple mantle sleeping
  With your little face on mine,
  Hearing not your mother weeping
  And the breaking of the brine."


Well, the daylight came at last, and the great chest was driven by the
waves against the shore of an island. There the brass-bound chest lay,
with the Princess and her baby in it, till a man of that country came
past, and saw it, and dragged it on to the beach, and when he had broken
it open, behold! there was a beautiful lady and a little boy. So he took
them home, and was very kind to them, and brought up the boy till he was
a young man. Now when the boy had come to his full strength the King of
that country fell in love with his mother, and wanted to marry her, but
he knew that she would never part from her boy. So he thought of a plan
to get rid of the boy, and this was his plan: A great Queen of a country
not far off was going to be married, and this king said that all his
subjects must bring him wedding presents to give her. And he made a
feast to which he invited them all, and they all brought their presents;
some brought gold cups, and some brought necklaces of gold and amber,
and some brought beautiful horses; but the boy had nothing, though he
was the son of a princess, for his mother had nothing to give him. Then
the rest of the company began to laugh at him, and the King said: "If
you have nothing else to give, at least you might go and fetch the
Terrible Head."

The boy was proud, and spoke without thinking:

"Then I swear that I _will_ bring the Terrible Head, if it may be
brought by a living man. But of what head you speak I know not."

Then they told him that somewhere, a long way off, there dwelt three
dreadful sisters, monstrous ogrish women, with golden wings and claws
of brass, and with serpents growing on their heads instead of hair. Now
these women were so awful to look on that whoever saw them was turned
at once into stone. And two of them could not be put to death, but the
youngest, whose face was very beautiful, could be killed, and it was
_her_ head that the boy had promised to bring. You may imagine it was no
easy adventure.

When he heard all this he was perhaps sorry that he had sworn to bring
the Terrible Head, but he was determined to keep his oath. So he went
out from the feast, where they all sat drinking and making merry, and
he walked alone beside the sea in the dusk of the evening, at the place
where the great chest, with himself and his mother in it, had been cast
ashore.

There he went and sat down on a rock, looking toward the sea, and
wondering how he should begin to fulfill his vow. Then he felt some one
touch him on the shoulder; and he turned, and saw a young man like a
king's son, having with him a tall and beautiful lady, whose blue eyes
shone like stars. They were taller than mortal men, and the young man
had a staff in his hand with golden wings on it, and two golden serpents
twisted round it, and he had wings on his cap and on his shoes. He spoke
to the boy, and asked him why he was so unhappy; and the boy told him
how he had sworn to bring the Terrible Head, and knew not how to begin
to set about the adventure.

Then the beautiful lady also spoke, and said that "it was a foolish oath
and a hasty, but it might be kept if a brave man had sworn it." Then the
boy answered that he was not afraid, if only he knew the way.

Then the lady said that to kill the dreadful woman with the golden wings
and the brass claws, and to cut off her head, he needed three things:
first, a Cap of Darkness, which would make him invisible when he wore
it; next, a Sword of Sharpness, which would cleave iron at one blow; and
last, the Shoes of Swiftness, with which he might fly in the air.

The boy answered that he knew not where such things were to be procured,
and that, wanting them, he could only try and fail. Then the young man,
taking off his own shoes, said: "First, you shall use these shoes till
you have taken the Terrible Head, and then you must give them back to
me. And with these shoes you will fly as fleet as a bird, or a thought,
over the land or over the waves of the sea, wherever the shoes know the
way. But there are ways which they do not know, roads beyond the borders
of the world. And these roads have you to travel. Now first you must
go to the Three Gray Sisters, who live far off in the north, and are so
very cold that they have only one eye and one tooth among the three. You
must creep up close to them, and as one of them passes the eye to the
other you must seize it, and refuse to give it up till they have told
you the way to the Three Fairies of the Garden, and _they_ will give you
the Cap of Darkness and the Sword of Sharpness, and show you how to wing
beyond this world to the land of the Terrible Head."

Then the beautiful lady said: "Go forth at once, and do not return to
say good-by to your mother, for these things must be done quickly, and
the Shoes of Swiftness themselves will carry you to the land of the
Three Gray Sisters--for they know the measure of that way."

So the boy thanked her, and he fastened on the Shoes of Swiftness, and
turned to say good-by to the young man and the lady. But, behold! they
had vanished, he knew not how or where! Then he leaped in the air to try
the Shoes of Swiftness, and they carried him more swiftly than the wind,
over the warm blue sea, over the happy lands of the south, over the
northern peoples who drank mare's milk and lived in great wagons,
wandering after their flocks. Across the wide rivers, where the wild
fowl rose and fled before him, and over the plains and the cold North
Sea he went, over the fields of snow and the hills of ice, to a place
where the world ends, and all water is frozen, and there are no men, nor
beasts, nor any green grass. There in a blue cave of the ice he found
the Three Gray Sisters, the oldest of living things. Their hair was as
white as the snow, and their flesh of an icy blue, and they mumbled and
nodded in a kind of dream, and their frozen breath hung round them like
a cloud. Now the opening of the cave in the ice was narrow, and it
was not easy to pass in without touching one of the Gray Sisters. But,
floating on the Shoes of Swiftness, the boy just managed to steal in,
and waited till one of the sisters said to another, who had their one
eye:

"Sister, what do you see? do you see old times coming back?"

"No, sister."

"Then give _me_ the eye, for perhaps I can see farther than you."

Then the first sister passed the eye to the second, but as the second
groped for it the boy caught it cleverly out of her hand.

"Where is the eye, sister?" said the second gray woman.

"You have taken it yourself, sister," said the first gray woman.

"Have you lost the eye, sister? have you lost the eye?" said the third
gray woman; "shall we _never_ find it again, and see old times coming
back?"

Then the boy slipped from behind them out of the cold cave into the air,
and he laughed aloud.

When the gray women heard that laugh they began to weep, for now they
knew that a stranger had robbed them, and that they could not help
themselves, and their tears froze as they fell from the hollows where no
eyes were, and rattled on the icy ground of the cave. Then they began to
implore the boy to give them their eye back again, and he could not help
being sorry for them, they were so pitiful. But he said he would never
give them the eye till they told him the way to the Fairies of the
Garden.

Then they wrung their hands miserably, for they guessed why he had come,
and how he was going to try to win the Terrible Head. Now the Dreadful
Women were akin to the Three Gray Sisters, and it was hard for them to
tell the boy the way. But at last they told him to keep always south,
and with the land on his left and the sea on his right, till he reached
the Island of the Fairies of the Garden. Then he gave them back the
eye, and they began to look out once more for the old times coming back
again. But the boy flew south between sea and land, keeping the land
always on his left hand, till he saw a beautiful island crowned with
flowering trees. There he alighted, and there he found the Three Fairies
of the Garden. They were like three very beautiful young women, dressed
one in green, one in white, and one in red, and they were dancing and
singing round an apple tree with apples of gold, and this was their
song:

       THE SONG OF THE WESTERN FAIRIES

     Round and round the apples of gold,
       Round and round dance we;
     Thus do we dance from the days of old
       About the enchanted tree;
     Round, and round, and round we go,
     While the spring is green, or the stream shall flow,
       Or the wind shall stir the sea!

     There is none may taste of the golden fruit
       Till the golden new time come
     Many a tree shall spring from shoot,
     Many a blossom be withered at root,
       Many a song be dumb;
     Broken and still shall be many a lute
       Or ever the new times come!

     Round and round the tree of gold,
       Round and round dance we,
     So doth the great world spin from of old,
     Summer and winter, and fire and cold,
     Song that is sung, and tale that is told,
     Even as we dance, that fold and unfold
       Round the stem of the fairy tree!


These grave dancing fairies were very unlike the Grey Women, and they
were glad to see the boy, and treated him kindly. Then they asked him
why he had come; and he told them how he was sent to find the Sword of
Sharpness and the Cap of Darkness. And the fairies gave him these, and
a wallet, and a shield, and belted the sword, which had a diamond blade,
round his waist, and the cap they set on his head, and told him that now
even they could not see him though they were fairies. Then he took it
off, and they each kissed him and wished him good fortune, and then they
began again their eternal dance round the golden tree, for it is their
business to guard it till the new times come, or till the world's
ending. So the boy put the cap on his head, and hung the wallet round
his waist, and the shining shield on his shoulders, and flew beyond the
great river that lies coiled like a serpent round the whole world. And
by the banks of that river, there he found the three Terrible Women all
asleep beneath a poplar tree, and the dead poplar leaves lay all about
them. Their golden wings were folded and their brass claws were crossed,
and two of them slept with their hideous heads beneath their wings
like birds, and the serpents in their hair writhed out from under the
feathers of gold. But the youngest slept between her two sisters, and
she lay on her back, with her beautiful sad face turned to the sky; and
though she slept her eyes were wide open. If the boy had seen her he
would have been changed into stone by the terror and the pity of it,
she was so awful; but he had thought of a plan for killing her without
looking on her face. As soon as he caught sight of the three from far
off he took his shining shield from his shoulders, and held it up like
a mirror, so that he saw the Dreadful Women reflected in it, and did not
see the Terrible Head itself. Then he came nearer and nearer, till he
reckoned that he was within a sword's stroke of the youngest, and he
guessed where he should strike a back blow behind him. Then he drew the
Sword of Sharpness and struck once, and the Terrible Head was cut from
the shoulders of the creature, and the blood leaped out and struck him
like a blow. But he thrust the Terrible Head into his wallet, and flew
away without looking behind. Then the two Dreadful Sisters who were left
wakened, and rose in the air like great birds; and though they could not
see him because of his Cap of Darkness, they flew after him up the wind,
following by the scent through the clouds, like hounds hunting in a
wood. They came so close that he could hear the clatter of their golden
wings, and their shrieks to each other: "_here, here,_" "_no, there;
this way he went,_" as they chased him. But the Shoes of Swiftness flew
too fast for them, and at last their cries and the rattle of their wings
died away as he crossed the great river that runs round the world.

Now when the horrible creatures were far in the distance, and the boy
found himself on the right side of the river, he flew straight eastward,
trying to seek his own country. But as he looked down from the air he
saw a very strange sight--a beautiful girl chained to a stake at the
high-water mark of the sea. The girl was so frightened or so tired that
she was only prevented from falling by the iron chain about her waist,
and there she hung, as if she were dead. The boy was very sorry for her
and flew down and stood beside her. When he spoke she raised her head
and looked round, but his voice only seemed to frighten her. Then he
remembered that he was wearing the Cap of Darkness, and that she could
only hear him, not see him. So he took it off, and there he stood before
her, the handsomest young man she had ever seen in all her life, with
short curly yellow hair, and blue eyes, and a laughing face. And he
thought her the most beautiful girl in the world. So first with one blow
of the Sword of Sharpness he cut the iron chain that bound her, and then
he asked her what she did there, and why men treated her so cruelly. And
she told him that she was the daughter of the King of that country, and
that she was tied there to be eaten by a monstrous beast out of the sea;
for the beast came and devoured a girl every day. Now the lot had fallen
on her; and as she was just saying this a long fierce head of a cruel
sea creature rose out of the waves and snapped at the girl. But the
beast had been too greedy and too hurried, so he missed his aim the
first time. Before he could rise and bite again the boy had whipped the
Terrible Head out of his wallet and held it up. And when the sea beast
leaped out once more its eyes fell on the head, and instantly it was
turned into a stone. And the stone beast is there on the sea-coast to
this day.

Then the boy and the girl went to the palace of the King, her father,
where everyone was weeping for her death, and they could hardly believe
their eyes when they saw her come back well. And the King and Queen made
much of the boy, and could not contain themselves for delight when they
found he wanted to marry their daughter. So the two were married with
the most splendid rejoicings, and when they had passed some time at
court they went home in a ship to the boy's own country. For he could
not carry his bride through the air, so he took the Shoes of Swiftness,
and the Cap of Darkness, and the Sword of Sharpness up to a lonely place
in the hills. There he left them, and there they were found by the man
and woman who had met him at home beside the sea, and had helped him to
start on his journey.

When this had been done the boy and his bride set forth for home, and
landed at the harbor of his native land. But whom should he meet in the
very street of the town but his own mother, flying for her life from the
wicked King, who now wished to kill her because he found that she would
never marry him! For if she had liked the King ill before, she liked him
far worse now that he had caused her son to disappear so suddenly. She
did not know, of course, where the boy had gone, but thought the King
had slain him secretly. So now she was running for her very life,
and the wicked King was following her with a sword in his hand. Then,
behold! she ran into her son's very arms, but he had only time to kiss
her and step in front of her, when the King struck at him with his
sword. The boy caught the blow on his shield, and cried to the King:

"I swore to bring you the Terrible Head, and see how I keep my oath!"

Then he drew forth the head from his wallet, and when the King's eyes
fell on it, instantly he was turned into stone, just as he stood there
with his sword lifted!

Now all the people rejoiced, because the wicked King should rule them no
longer. And they asked the boy to be their king, but he said no, he must
take his mother home to her father's house. So the people chose for king
the man who had been kind to his mother when first she was cast on the
island in the great chest.

Presently the boy and his mother and his wife set sail for his mother's
own country, from which she had been driven so unkindly. But on the way
they stayed at the court of a king, and it happened that he was
holding games, and giving prizes to the best runners, boxers, and
quoit-throwers. Then the boy would try his strength with the rest, but
he threw the quoit so far that it went beyond what had ever been thrown
before, and fell in the crowd, striking a man so that he died. Now this
man was no other than the father of the boy's mother, who had fled away
from his own kingdom for fear his grandson should find him and kill him
after all. Thus he was destroyed by his own cowardice and by chance, and
thus the prophecy was fulfilled. But the boy and his wife and his mother
went back to the kingdom that was theirs, and lived long and happily
after all their troubles.




THE STORY OF PRETTY GOLDILOCKS


Once upon a time there was a princess who was the prettiest creature in
the world. And because she was so beautiful, and because her hair was
like the finest gold, and waved and rippled nearly to the ground, she
was called Pretty Goldilocks. She always wore a crown of flowers, and
her dresses were embroidered with diamonds and pearls, and everybody who
saw her fell in love with her.

Now one of her neighbors was a young king who was not married. He was
very rich and handsome, and when he heard all that was said about Pretty
Goldilocks, though he had never seen her, he fell so deeply in love
with her that he could neither eat nor drink. So he resolved to send an
ambassador to ask her in marriage. He had a splendid carriage made for
his ambassador, and gave him more than a hundred horses and a hundred
servants, and told him to be sure and bring the Princess back with him.
After he had started nothing else was talked of at Court, and the King
felt so sure that the Princess would consent that he set his people to
work at pretty dresses and splendid furniture, that they might be
ready by the time she came. Meanwhile, the ambassador arrived at the
Princess's palace and delivered his little message, but whether she
happened to be cross that day, or whether the compliment did not please
her, is not known. She only answered that she was very much obliged
to the King, but she had no wish to be married. The ambassador set off
sadly on his homeward way, bringing all the King's presents back with
him, for the Princess was too well brought up to accept the pearls
and diamonds when she would not accept the King, so she had only kept
twenty-five English pins that he might not be vexed.

When the ambassador reached the city, where the King was waiting
impatiently, everybody was very much annoyed with him for not bringing
the Princess, and the King cried like a baby, and nobody could console
him. Now there was at the Court a young man, who was more clever and
handsome than anyone else. He was called Charming, and everyone loved
him, excepting a few envious people who were angry at his being the
King's favorite and knowing all the State secrets. He happened to one
day be with some people who were speaking of the ambassador's return
and saying that his going to the Princess had not done much good, when
Charming said rashly:

"If the King had sent me to the Princess Goldilocks I am sure she would
have come back with me."

His enemies at once went to the King and said:

"You will hardly believe, sire, what Charming has the audacity to
say--that if _he_ had been sent to the Princess Goldilocks she would
certainly have come back with him. He seems to think that he is so much
handsomer than you that the Princess would have fallen in love with him
and followed him willingly." The King was very angry when he heard this.

"Ha, ha!" said he; "does he laugh at my unhappiness, and think himself
more fascinating than I am? Go, and let him be shut up in my great tower
to die of hunger."

So the King's guards went to fetch Charming, who had thought no more of
his rash speech, and carried him off to prison with great cruelty. The
poor prisoner had only a little straw for his bed, and but for a little
stream of water which flowed through the tower he would have died of
thirst.

One day when he was in despair he said to himself:

"How can I have offended the King? I am his most faithful subject, and
have done nothing against him."

The King chanced to be passing the tower and recognized the voice of his
former favorite. He stopped to listen in spite of Charming's enemies,
who tried to persuade him to have nothing more to do with the traitor.
But the King said:

"Be quiet, I wish to hear what he says."

And then he opened the tower door and called to Charming, who came very
sadly and kissed the King's hand, saying:

"What have I done, sire, to deserve this cruel treatment?"

"You mocked me and my ambassador," said the King, "and you said that
if I had sent you for the Princess Goldilocks you would certainly have
brought her back."

"It is quite true, sire," replied Charming; "I should have drawn such a
picture of you, and represented your good qualities in such a way,
that I am certain the Princess would have found you irresistible. But I
cannot see what there is in that to make you angry."

The King could not see any cause for anger either when the matter was
presented to him in this light, and he began to frown very fiercely at
the courtiers who had so misrepresented his favorite.

So he took Charming back to the palace with him, and after seeing that
he had a very good supper he said to him:

"You know that I love Pretty Goldilocks as much as ever, her refusal has
not made any difference to me; but I don't know how to make her change
her mind; I really should like to send you, to see if you can persuade
her to marry me."

Charming replied that he was perfectly willing to go, and would set out
the very next day.

"But you must wait till I can get a grand escort for you," said the
King. But Charming said that he only wanted a good horse to ride, and
the King, who was delighted at his being ready to start so promptly,
gave him letters to the Princess, and bade him good speed. It was on a
Monday morning that he set out all alone upon his errand, thinking of
nothing but how he could persuade the Princess Goldilocks to marry
the King. He had a writing-book in his pocket, and whenever any happy
thought struck him he dismounted from his horse and sat down under
the trees to put it into the harangue which he was preparing for the
Princess, before he forgot it.

One day when he had started at the very earliest dawn, and was riding
over a great meadow, he suddenly had a capital idea, and, springing from
his horse, he sat down under a willow tree which grew by a little river.
When he had written it down he was looking round him, pleased to find
himself in such a pretty place, when all at once he saw a great golden
carp lying gasping and exhausted upon the grass. In leaping after little
flies she had thrown herself high upon the bank, where she had lain till
she was nearly dead. Charming had pity upon her, and, though he couldn't
help thinking that she would have been very nice for dinner, he picked
her up gently and put her back into the water. As soon as Dame Carp
felt the refreshing coolness of the water she sank down joyfully to the
bottom of the river, then, swimming up to the bank quite boldly, she
said:

"I thank you, Charming, for the kindness you have done me. You have
saved my life; one day I will repay you." So saying, she sank down into
the water again, leaving Charming greatly astonished at her politeness.

Another day, as he journeyed on, he saw a raven in great distress. The
poor bird was closely pursued by an eagle, which would soon have eaten
it up, had not Charming quickly fitted an arrow to his bow and shot the
eagle dead. The raven perched upon a tree very joyfully.

"Charming," said he, "it was very generous of you to rescue a poor
raven; I am not ungrateful, some day I will repay you."

Charming thought it was very nice of the raven to say so, and went on
his way.

Before the sun rose he found himself in a thick wood where it was too
dark for him to see his path, and here he heard an owl crying as if it
were in despair.

"Hark!" said he, "that must be an owl in great trouble, I am sure it has
gone into a snare"; and he began to hunt about, and presently found a
great net which some bird-catchers had spread the night before.

"What a pity it is that men do nothing but torment and persecute poor
creatures which never do them any harm!" said he, and he took out his
knife and cut the cords of the net, and the owl flitted away into the
darkness, but then turning, with one flicker of her wings, she came back
to Charming and said:

"It does not need many words to tell you how great a service you have
done me. I was caught; in a few minutes the fowlers would have been
here--without your help I should have been killed. I am grateful, and
one day I will repay you."

These three adventures were the only ones of any consequence that befell
Charming upon his journey, and he made all the haste he could to reach
the palace of the Princess Goldilocks.

When he arrived he thought everything he saw delightful and magnificent.
Diamonds were as plentiful as pebbles, and the gold and silver, the
beautiful dresses, the sweetmeats and pretty things that were everywhere
quite amazed him; he thought to himself: "If the Princess consents to
leave all this, and come with me to marry the King, he may think himself
lucky!"

Then he dressed himself carefully in rich brocade, with scarlet and
white plumes, and threw a splendid embroidered scarf over his shoulder,
and, looking as gay and as graceful as possible, he presented himself at
the door of the palace, carrying in his arm a tiny pretty dog which
he had bought on the way. The guards saluted him respectfully, and a
messenger was sent to the Princess to announce the arrival of Charming
as ambassador of her neighbor the King.

"Charming," said the Princess, "the name promises well; I have no doubt
that he is good looking and fascinates everybody."

"Indeed he does, madam," said all her maids of honor in one breath. "We
saw him from the window of the garret where we were spinning flax, and
we could do nothing but look at him as long as he was in sight."

"Well to be sure," said the Princess, "that's how you amuse yourselves,
is it? Looking at strangers out of the window! Be quick and give me my
blue satin embroidered dress, and comb out my golden hair. Let somebody
make me fresh garlands of flowers, and give me my high-heeled shoes and
my fan, and tell them to sweep my great hall and my throne, for I want
everyone to say I am really 'Pretty Goldilocks.'"

You can imagine how all her maids scurried this way and that to make the
Princess ready, and how in their haste they knocked their heads together
and hindered each other, till she thought they would never have done.
However, at last they led her into the gallery of mirrors that she might
assure herself that nothing was lacking in her appearance, and then
she mounted her throne of gold, ebony, and ivory, while her ladies took
their guitars and began to sing softly. Then Charming was led in, and
was so struck with astonishment and admiration that at first not a word
could he say. But presently he took courage and delivered his harangue,
bravely ending by begging the Princess to spare him the disappointment
of going back without her.

"Sir Charming," answered she, "all the reasons you have given me are
very good ones, and I assure you that I should have more pleasure in
obliging you than anyone else, but you must know that a month ago as I
was walking by the river with my ladies I took off my glove, and as I
did so a ring that I was wearing slipped off my finger and rolled into
the water. As I valued it more than my kingdom, you may imagine how
vexed I was at losing it, and I vowed to never listen to any proposal of
marriage unless the ambassador first brought me back my ring. So now
you know what is expected of you, for if you talked for fifteen days and
fifteen nights you could not make me change my mind."

Charming was very much surprised by this answer, but he bowed low to the
Princess, and begged her to accept the embroidered scarf and the tiny
dog he had brought with him. But she answered that she did not want any
presents, and that he was to remember what she had just told him. When
he got back to his lodging he went to bed without eating any supper, and
his little dog, who was called Frisk, couldn't eat any either, but came
and lay down close to him. All night Charming sighed and lamented.

"How am I to find a ring that fell into the river a month ago?" said
he. "It is useless to try; the Princess must have told me to do it on
purpose, knowing it was impossible." And then he sighed again.

Frisk heard him and said:

"My dear master, don't despair; the luck may change, you are too good
not to be happy. Let us go down to the river as soon as it is light."

But Charming only gave him two little pats and said nothing, and very
soon he fell asleep.

At the first glimmer of dawn Frisk began to jump about, and when he had
waked Charming they went out together, first into the garden, and then
down to the river's brink, where they wandered up and down. Charming was
thinking sadly of having to go back unsuccessful when he heard someone
calling: "Charming, Charming!" He looked all about him and thought he
must be dreaming, as he could not see anybody. Then he walked on and the
voice called again: "Charming, Charming!"

"Who calls me?" said he. Frisk, who was very small and could look
closely into the water, cried out: "I see a golden carp coming." And
sure enough there was the great carp, who said to Charming:

"You saved my life in the meadow by the willow tree, and I promised that
I would repay you. Take this, it is Princess Goldilock's ring." Charming
took the ring out of Dame Carp's mouth, thanking her a thousand times,
and he and tiny Frisk went straight to the palace, where someone told
the Princess that he was asking to see her.

"Ah! poor fellow," said she, "he must have come to say good-by, finding
it impossible to do as I asked."

So in came Charming, who presented her with the ring and said:

"Madam, I have done your bidding. Will it please you to marry my
master?" When the Princess saw her ring brought back to her unhurt she
was so astonished that she thought she must be dreaming.

"Truly, Charming," said she, "you must be the favorite of some fairy, or
you could never have found it."

"Madam," answered he, "I was helped by nothing but my desire to obey
your wishes."

"Since you are so kind," said she, "perhaps you will do me another
service, for till it is done I will never be married. There is a prince
not far from here whose name is Galifron, who once wanted to marry me,
but when I refused he uttered the most terrible threats against me, and
vowed that he would lay waste my country. But what could I do? I could
not marry a frightful giant as tall as a tower, who eats up people as
a monkey eats chestnuts, and who talks so loud that anybody who has to
listen to him becomes quite deaf. Nevertheless, he does not cease to
persecute me and to kill my subjects. So before I can listen to your
proposal you must kill him and bring me his head."

Charming was rather dismayed at this command, but he answered:

"Very well, Princess, I will fight this Galifron; I believe that he will
kill me, but at any rate I shall die in your defense."

Then the Princess was frightened and said everything she could think of
to prevent Charming from fighting the giant, but it was of no use, and
he went out to arm himself suitably, and then, taking little Frisk with
him, he mounted his horse and set out for Galifron's country. Everyone
he met told him what a terrible giant Galifron was, and that nobody
dared go near him; and the more he heard, the more frightened he grew.
Frisk tried to encourage him by saying: "While you are fighting the
giant, dear master, I will go and bite his heels, and when he stoops
down to look at me you can kill him."

Charming praised his little dog's plan, but knew that this help would
not do much good.

At last he drew near the giant's castle, and saw to his horror that
every path that led to it was strewn with bones. Before long he saw
Galifron coming. His head was higher than the tallest trees, and he sang
in a terrible voice:

  "Bring out your little boys and girls,
  Pray do not stay to do their curls,
  For I shall eat so very many,
  I shall not know if they have any."


Thereupon Charming sang out as loud as he could to the same tune:

  "Come out and meet the valiant Charming
  Who finds you not at all alarming;
  Although he is not very tall,
  He's big enough to make you fall."


The rhymes were not very correct, but you see he had made them up so
quickly that it is a miracle that they were not worse; especially as he
was horribly frightened all the time. When Galifron heard these words he
looked all about him, and saw Charming standing, sword in hand this put
the giant into a terrible rage, and he aimed a blow at Charming with his
huge iron club, which would certainly have killed him if it had reached
him, but at that instant a raven perched upon the giant's head, and,
pecking with its strong beak and beating with its great wings so
confused and blinded him that all his blows fell harmlessly upon the
air, and Charming, rushing in, gave him several strokes with his sharp
sword so that he fell to the ground. Whereupon Charming cut off his head
before he knew anything about it, and the raven from a tree close by
croaked out:

"You see I have not forgotten the good turn you did me in killing the
eagle. To-day I think I have fulfilled my promise of repaying you."

"Indeed, I owe you more gratitude than you ever owed me," replied
Charming.

And then he mounted his horse and rode off with Galifron's head.

When he reached the city the people ran after him in crowds, crying:

"Behold the brave Charming, who has killed the giant!" And their shouts
reached the Princess's ear, but she dared not ask what was happening,
for fear she should hear that Charming had been killed. But very soon
he arrived at the palace with the giant's head, of which she was still
terrified, though it could no longer do her any harm.

"Princess," said Charming, "I have killed your enemy; I hope you will
now consent to marry the King my master."

"Oh dear! no," said the Princess, "not until you have brought me some
water from the Gloomy Cavern.

"Not far from here there is a deep cave, the entrance to which is
guarded by two dragons with fiery eyes, who will not allow anyone to
pass them. When you get into the cavern you will find an immense hole,
which you must go down, and it is full of toads and snakes; at the
bottom of this hole there is another little cave, in which rises the
Fountain of Health and Beauty. It is some of this water that I really
must have: everything it touches becomes wonderful. The beautiful things
will always remain beautiful, and the ugly things become lovely. If one
is young one never grows old, and if one is old one becomes young. You
see, Charming, I could not leave my kingdom without taking some of it
with me."

"Princess," said he, "you at least can never need this water, but I am
an unhappy ambassador, whose death you desire. Where you send me I will
go, though I know I shall never return."

And, as the Princess Goldilocks showed no sign of relenting, he started
with his little dog for the Gloomy Cavern. Everyone he met on the way
said:

"What a pity that a handsome young man should throw away his life so
carelessly! He is going to the cavern alone, though if he had a
hundred men with him he could not succeed. Why does the Princess ask
impossibilities?" Charming said nothing, but he was very sad. When he
was near the top of a hill he dismounted to let his horse graze, while
Frisk amused himself by chasing flies. Charming knew he could not be far
from the Gloomy Cavern, and on looking about him he saw a black hideous
rock from which came a thick smoke, followed in a moment by one of the
dragons with fire blazing from his mouth and eyes. His body was yellow
and green, and his claws scarlet, and his tail was so long that it lay
in a hundred coils. Frisk was so terrified at the sight of it that he
did not know where to hide. Charming, quite determined to get the water
or die, now drew his sword, and, taking the crystal flask which Pretty
Goldilocks had given him to fill, said to Frisk:

"I feel sure that I shall never come back from this expedition; when I
am dead, go to the Princess and tell her that her errand has cost me
my life. Then find the King my master, and relate all my adventures to
him."

As he spoke he heard a voice calling: "Charming, Charming!"

"Who calls me?" said he; then he saw an owl sitting in a hollow tree,
who said to him:

"You saved my life when I was caught in the net, now I can repay you.
Trust me with the flask, for I know all the ways of the Gloomy Cavern,
and can fill it from the Fountain of Beauty." Charming was only too glad
to give her the flask, and she flitted into the cavern quite unnoticed
by the dragon, and after some time returned with the flask, filled to
the very brim with sparkling water. Charming thanked her with all his
heart, and joyfully hastened back to the town.

He went straight to the palace and gave the flask to the Princess, who
had no further objection to make. So she thanked Charming, and ordered
that preparations should be made for her departure, and they soon set
out together. The Princess found Charming such an agreeable companion
that she sometimes said to him: "Why didn't we stay where we were? I
could have made you king, and we should have been so happy!"

But Charming only answered:

"I could not have done anything that would have vexed my master so
much, even for a kingdom, or to please you, though I think you are as
beautiful as the sun."

At last they reached the King's great city, and he came out to meet the
Princess, bringing magnificent presents, and the marriage was celebrated
with great rejoicings. But Goldilocks was so fond of Charming that she
could not be happy unless he was near her, and she was always singing
his praises.

"If it hadn't been for Charming," she said to the King, "I should never
have come here; you ought to be very much obliged to him, for he did the
most impossible things and got me water from the Fountain of Beauty, so
I can never grow old, and shall get prettier every year."

Then Charming's enemies said to the King:

"It is a wonder that you are not jealous, the Queen thinks there is
nobody in the world like Charming. As if anybody you had sent could not
have done just as much!"

"It is quite true, now I come to think of it," said the King. "Let him
be chained hand and foot, and thrown into the tower."

So they took Charming, and as a reward for having served the King so
faithfully he was shut up in the tower, where he only saw the jailer,
who brought him a piece of black bread and a pitcher of water every day.

However, little Frisk came to console him, and told him all the news.

When Pretty Goldilocks heard what had happened she threw herself at the
King's feet and begged him to set Charming free, but the more she cried,
the more angry he was, and at last she saw that it was useless to say
any more; but it made her very sad. Then the King took it into his
head that perhaps he was not handsome enough to please the Princess
Goldilocks, and he thought he would bathe his face with the water
from the Fountain of Beauty, which was in the flask on a shelf in the
Princess's room, where she had placed it that she might see it often.
Now it happened that one of the Princess's ladies in chasing a spider
had knocked the flask off the shelf and broken it, and every drop of the
water had been spilt. Not knowing what to do, she had hastily swept away
the pieces of crystal, and then remembered that in the King's room she
had seen a flask of exactly the same shape, also filled with sparkling
water. So, without saying a word, she fetched it and stood it upon the
Queen's shelf.

Now the water in this flask was what was used in the kingdom for getting
rid of troublesome people. Instead of having their heads cut off in the
usual way, their faces were bathed with the water, and they instantly
fell asleep and never woke up any more. So, when the King, thinking
to improve his beauty, took the flask and sprinkled the water upon his
face, _he_ fell asleep, and nobody could wake him.

Little Frisk was the first to hear the news, and he ran to tell
Charming, who sent him to beg the Princess not to forget the poor
prisoner. All the palace was in confusion on account of the King's
death, but tiny Frisk made his way through the crowd to the Princess's
side, and said:

"Madam, do not forget poor Charming."

Then she remembered all he had done for her, and without saying a word
to anyone went straight to the tower, and with her own hands took off
Charming's chains. Then, putting a golden crown upon his head, and the
royal mantle upon his shoulders, she said:

"Come, faithful Charming, I make you king, and will take you for my
husband."

Charming, once more free and happy, fell at her feet and thanked her for
her gracious words.

Everybody was delighted that he should be king, and the wedding, which
took place at once, was the prettiest that can be imagined, and Prince
Charming and Princess Goldilocks lived happily ever after.(1)


(1) Madame d'Aulnoy.




THE HISTORY OF WHITTINGTON


Dick Whittington was a very little boy when his father and mother died;
so little, indeed, that he never knew them, nor the place where he was
born. He strolled about the country as ragged as a colt, till he met
with a wagoner who was going to London, and who gave him leave to walk
all the way by the side of his wagon without paying anything for his
passage. This pleased little Whittington very much, as he wanted to see
London sadly, for he had heard that the streets were paved with
gold, and he was willing to get a bushel of it; but how great was his
disappointment, poor boy! when he saw the streets covered with dirt
instead of gold, and found himself in a strange place, without a friend,
without food, and without money.

Though the wagoner was so charitable as to let him walk up by the side
of the wagon for nothing, he took care not to know him when he came to
town, and the poor boy was, in a little time, so cold and hungry that he
wished himself in a good kitchen and by a warm fire in the country.

In his distress he asked charity of several people, and one of them bid
him "Go to work for an idle rogue." "That I will," said Whittington,
"with all my heart; I will work for you if you will let me."

The man, who thought this savored of wit and impertinence (though the
poor lad intended only to show his readiness to work), gave him a blow
with a stick which broke his head so that the blood ran down. In this
situation, and fainting for want of food, he laid himself down at the
door of one Mr. Fitzwarren, a merchant, where the cook saw him, and,
being an ill-natured hussy, ordered him to go about his business or she
would scald him. At this time Mr. Fitzwarren came from the Exchange, and
began also to scold at the poor boy, bidding him to go to work.

Whittington answered that he should be glad to work if anybody would
employ him, and that he should be able if he could get some victuals to
eat, for he had had nothing for three days, and he was a poor country
boy, and knew nobody, and nobody would employ him.

He then endeavored to get up, but he was so very weak that he fell down
again, which excited so much compassion in the merchant that he ordered
the servants to take him in and give him some meat and drink, and let
him help the cook to do any dirty work that she had to set him about.
People are too apt to reproach those who beg with being idle, but give
themselves no concern to put them in the way of getting business to do,
or considering whether they are able to do it, which is not charity.

But we return to Whittington, who could have lived happy in this worthy
family had he not been bumped about by the cross cook, who must be
always roasting and basting, or when the spit was idle employed her
hands upon poor Whittington! At last Miss Alice, his master's daughter,
was informed of it, and then she took compassion on the poor boy, and
made the servants treat him kindly.

Besides the crossness of the cook, Whittington had another difficulty
to get over before he could be happy. He had, by order of his master, a
flock-bed placed for him in a garret, where there was a number of rats
and mice that often ran over the poor boy's nose and disturbed him
in his sleep. After some time, however, a gentleman who came to his
master's house gave Whittington a penny for brushing his shoes. This
he put into his pocket, being determined to lay it out to the best
advantage; and the next day, seeing a woman in the street with a cat
under her arm, he ran up to know the price of it. The woman (as the cat
was a good mouser) asked a deal of money for it, but on Whittington's
telling her he had but a penny in the world, and that he wanted a cat
sadly, she let him have it.

This cat Whittington concealed in the garret, for fear she should be
beat about by his mortal enemy the cook, and here she soon killed or
frightened away the rats and mice, so that the poor boy could now sleep
as sound as a top.

Soon after this the merchant, who had a ship ready to sail, called
for his servants, as his custom was, in order that each of them might
venture something to try their luck; and whatever they sent was to pay
neither freight nor custom, for he thought justly that God Almighty
would bless him the more for his readiness to let the poor partake of
his fortune.

All the servants appeared but poor Whittington, who, having neither
money nor goods, could not think of sending anything to try his luck;
but his good friend Miss Alice, thinking his poverty kept him away,
ordered him to be called.

She then offered to lay down something for him, but the merchant told
his daughter that would not do, it must be something of his own. Upon
which poor Whittington said he had nothing but a cat which he bought
for a penny that was given him. "Fetch thy cat, boy," said the merchant,
"and send her." Whittington brought poor puss and delivered her to the
captain, with tears in his eyes, for he said he should now be disturbed
by the rats and mice as much as ever. All the company laughed at
the adventure but Miss Alice, who pitied the poor boy, and gave him
something to buy another cat.

While puss was beating the billows at sea, poor Whittington was severely
beaten at home by his tyrannical mistress the cook, who used him so
cruelly, and made such game of him for sending his cat to sea, that
at last the poor boy determined to run away from his place, and having
packed up the few things he had, he set out very early in the morning on
All-Hallows day. He traveled as far as Holloway, and there sat down on
a stone to consider what course he should take; but while he was thus
ruminating, Bow bells, of which there were only six, began to ring; and
he thought their sounds addressed him in this manner:

  "Turn again, Whittington,
  Thrice Lord Mayor of London."


"Lord Mayor of London!" said he to himself, "what would not one endure
to be Lord Mayor of London, and ride in such a fine coach? Well, I'll go
back again, and bear all the pummelling and ill-usage of Cicely rather
than miss the opportunity of being Lord Mayor!" So home he went, and
happily got into the house and about his business before Mrs. Cicely
made her appearance.

We must now follow Miss Puss to the coast of Africa. How perilous are
voyages at sea, how uncertain the winds and the waves, and how many
accidents attend a naval life!

The ship that had the cat on board was long beaten at sea, and at last,
by contrary winds, driven on a part of the coast of Barbary which was
inhabited by Moors unknown to the English. These people received our
countrymen with civility, and therefore the captain, in order to trade
with them, showed them the patterns of the goods he had on board, and
sent some of them to the King of the country, who was so well pleased
that he sent for the captain and the factor to come to his palace, which
was about a mile from the sea. Here they were placed, according to the
custom of the country, on rich carpets, flowered with gold and silver;
and the King and Queen being seated at the upper end of the room, dinner
was brought in, which consisted of many dishes; but no sooner were the
dishes put down but an amazing number of rats and mice came from all
quarters and devoured all the meat in an instant.

The factor, in surprise, turned round to the nobles and asked if these
vermin were not offensive. "Oh! yes," said they, "very offensive; and
the King would give half his treasure to be freed of them, for they
not only destroy his dinner, as you see, but they assault him in his
chamber, and even in bed, so that he is obliged to be watched while he
is sleeping, for fear of them."

The factor jumped for joy; he remembered poor Whittington and his
cat, and told the King he had a creature on board the ship that would
despatch all these vermin immediately. The King's heart heaved so high
at the joy which this news gave him that his turban dropped off his
head. "Bring this creature to me," said he; "vermin are dreadful in a
court, and if she will perform what you say I will load your ship with
gold and jewels in exchange for her." The factor, who knew his business,
took this opportunity to set forth the merits of Miss Puss. He told his
Majesty that it would be inconvenient to part with her, as, when she
was gone, the rats and mice might destroy the goods in the ship--but to
oblige his Majesty he would fetch her. "Run, run," said the Queen; "I am
impatient to see the dear creature."

Away flew the factor, while another dinner was providing, and returned
with the cat just as the rats and mice were devouring that also. He
immediately put down Miss Puss, who killed a great number of them.

The King rejoiced greatly to see his old enemies destroyed by so small a
creature, and the Queen was highly pleased, and desired the cat might
be brought near that she might look at her. Upon which the factor called
"Pussy, pussy, pussy!" and she came to him. He then presented her to the
Queen, who started back, and was afraid to touch a creature who had made
such havoc among the rats and mice; however, when the factor stroked
the cat and called "Pussy, pussy!" the Queen also touched her and cried
"Putty, putty!" for she had not learned English.

He then put her down on the Queen's lap, where she, purring, played with
her Majesty's hand, and then sang herself to sleep.

The King, having seen the exploits of Miss Puss, and being informed that
her kittens would stock the whole country, bargained with the captain
and factor for the whole ship's cargo, and then gave them ten times as
much for the cat as all the rest amounted to. On which, taking leave of
their Majesties and other great personages at court, they sailed with a
fair wind for England, whither we must now attend them.

The morn had scarcely dawned when Mr. Fitzwarren arose to count over
the cash and settle the business for that day. He had just entered the
counting-house, and seated himself at the desk, when somebody came,
tap, tap, at the door. "Who's there?" said Mr. Fitzwarren. "A friend,"
answered the other. "What friend can come at this unseasonable time?" "A
real friend is never unseasonable," answered the other. "I come to bring
you good news of your ship Unicorn." The merchant bustled up in such a
hurry that he forgot his gout; instantly opened the door, and who should
be seen waiting but the captain and factor, with a cabinet of jewels,
and a bill of lading, for which the merchant lifted up his eyes and
thanked heaven for sending him such a prosperous voyage. Then they told
him the adventures of the cat, and showed him the cabinet of jewels
which they had brought for Mr. Whittington. Upon which he cried out with
great earnestness, but not in the most poetical manner:

  "Go, send him in, and tell him of his fame,
  And call him Mr. Whittington by name."


It is not our business to animadvert upon these lines; we are not
critics, but historians. It is sufficient for us that they are the words
of Mr. Fitzwarren; and though it is beside our purpose, and perhaps not
in our power to prove him a good poet, we shall soon convince the reader
that he was a good man, which was a much better character; for when some
who were present told him that this treasure was too much for such a
poor boy as Whittington, he said: "God forbid that I should deprive him
of a penny; it is his own, and he shall have it to a farthing." He then
ordered Mr. Whittington in, who was at this time cleaning the kitchen
and would have excused himself from going into the counting-house,
saying the room was swept and his shoes were dirty and full of
hob-nails. The merchant, however, made him come in, and ordered a chair
to be set for him. Upon which, thinking they intended to make sport
of him, as had been too often the case in the kitchen, he besought his
master not to mock a poor simple fellow, who intended them no harm, but
let him go about his business. The merchant, taking him by the hand,
said: "Indeed, Mr. Whittington, I am in earnest with you, and sent for
you to congratulate you on your great success. Your cat has procured you
more money than I am worth in the world, and may you long enjoy it and
be happy!"

At length, being shown the treasure, and convinced by them that all of
it belonged to him, he fell upon his knees and thanked the Almighty for
his providential care of such a poor and miserable creature. He then
laid all the treasure at his master's feet, who refused to take any part
of it, but told him he heartily rejoiced at his prosperity, and hoped
the wealth he had acquired would be a comfort to him, and would make
him happy. He then applied to his mistress, and to his good friend
Miss Alice, who refused to take any part of the money, but told him she
heartily rejoiced at his good success, and wished him all imaginable
felicity. He then gratified the captain, factor, and the ship's crew for
the care they had taken of his cargo. He likewise distributed presents
to all the servants in the house, not forgetting even his old enemy the
cook, though she little deserved it.

After this Mr. Fitzwarren advised Mr. Whittington to send for the
necessary people and dress himself like a gentleman, and made him the
offer of his house to live in till he could provide himself with a
better.

Now it came to pass when Mr. Whittington's face was washed, his hair
curled, and he dressed in a rich suit of clothes, that he turned out
a genteel young fellow; and, as wealth contributes much to give a man
confidence, he in a little time dropped that sheepish behavior which
was principally occasioned by a depression of spirits, and soon grew a
sprightly and good companion, insomuch that Miss Alice, who had formerly
pitied him, now fell in love with him.

When her father perceived they had this good liking for each other
he proposed a match between them, to which both parties cheerfully
consented, and the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, Sheriffs, the Company
of Stationers, the Royal Academy of Arts, and a number of eminent
merchants attended the ceremony, and were elegantly treated at an
entertainment made for that purpose.

History further relates that they lived very happy, had several
children, and died at a good old age. Mr. Whittington served as Sheriff
of London and was three times Lord Mayor. In the last year of his
mayoralty he entertained King Henry V and his Queen, after his
conquest of France, upon which occasion the King, in consideration of
Whittington's merit, said: "Never had prince such a subject"; which
being told to Whittington at the table, he replied: "Never had subject
such a king." His Majesty, out of respect to his good character,
conferred the honor of knighthood on him soon after.

Sir Richard many years before his death constantly fed a great number
of poor citizens, built a church and a college to it, with a yearly
allowance for poor scholars, and near it erected a hospital.

He also built Newgate for criminals, and gave liberally to St.
Bartholomew's Hospital and other public charities.




THE WONDERFUL SHEEP


Once upon a time--in the days when the fairies lived--there was a king
who had three daughters, who were all young, and clever, and beautiful;
but the youngest of the three, who was called Miranda, was the prettiest
and the most beloved.

The King, her father, gave her more dresses and jewels in a month than
he gave the others in a year; but she was so generous that she shared
everything with her sisters, and they were all as happy and as fond of
one another as they could be.

Now, the King had some quarrelsome neighbors, who, tired of leaving him
in peace, began to make war upon him so fiercely that he feared he would
be altogether beaten if he did not make an effort to defend himself.
So he collected a great army and set off to fight them, leaving the
Princesses with their governess in a castle where news of the war was
brought every day--sometimes that the King had taken a town, or won a
battle, and, at last, that he had altogether overcome his enemies and
chased them out of his kingdom, and was coming back to the castle as
quickly as possible, to see his dear little Miranda whom he loved so
much.

The three Princesses put on dresses of satin, which they had had made
on purpose for this great occasion, one green, one blue, and the third
white; their jewels were the same colors. The eldest wore emeralds, the
second turquoises, and the youngest diamonds, and thus adorned they
went to meet the King, singing verses which they had composed about his
victories.

When he saw them all so beautiful and so gay he embraced them tenderly,
but gave Miranda more kisses than either of the others.

Presently a splendid banquet was served, and the King and his daughters
sat down to it, and as he always thought that there was some special
meaning in everything, he said to the eldest:

"Tell me why you have chosen a green dress."

"Sire," she answered, "having heard of your victories I thought that
green would signify my joy and the hope of your speedy return."

"That is a very good answer," said the King; "and you, my daughter," he
continued, "why did you take a blue dress?"

"Sire," said the Princess, "to show that we constantly hoped for your
success, and that the sight of you is as welcome to me as the sky with
its most beautiful stars."

"Why," said the King, "your wise answers astonish me, and you, Miranda.
What made you dress yourself all in white?

"Because, sire," she answered, "white suits me better than anything
else."

"What!" said the King angrily, "was that all you thought of, vain
child?"

"I thought you would be pleased with me," said the Princess; "that was
all."

The King, who loved her, was satisfied with this, and even pretended to
be pleased that she had not told him all her reasons at first.

"And now," said he, "as I have supped well, and it is not time yet to go
to bed, tell me what you dreamed last night."

The eldest said she had dreamed that he brought her a dress, and the
precious stones and gold embroidery on it were brighter than the sun.

The dream of the second was that the King had brought her a spinning
wheel and a distaff, that she might spin him some shirts.

But the youngest said: "I dreamed that my second sister was to be
married, and on her wedding-day, you, father, held a golden ewer and
said: 'Come, Miranda, and I will hold the water that you may dip your
hands in it.'"

The King was very angry indeed when he heard this dream, and frowned
horribly; indeed, he made such an ugly face that everyone knew how angry
he was, and he got up and went off to bed in a great hurry; but he could
not forget his daughter's dream.

"Does the proud girl wish to make me her slave?" he said to himself. "I
am not surprised at her choosing to dress herself in white satin without
a thought of me. She does not think me worthy of her consideration! But
I will soon put an end to her pretensions!"

He rose in a fury, and although it was not yet daylight, he sent for the
Captain of his Bodyguard, and said to him:

"You have heard the Princess Miranda's dream? I consider that it means
strange things against me, therefore I order you to take her away into
the forest and kill her, and, that I may be sure it is done, you must
bring me her heart and her tongue. If you attempt to deceive me you
shall be put to death!"

The Captain of the Guard was very much astonished when he heard this
barbarous order, but he did not dare to contradict the King for fear of
making him still more angry, or causing him to send someone else, so he
answered that he would fetch the Princess and do as the King had said.
When he went to her room they would hardly let him in, it was so early,
but he said that the King had sent for Miranda, and she got up quickly
and came out; a little black girl called Patypata held up her train, and
her pet monkey and her little dog ran after her. The monkey was called
Grabugeon, and the little dog Tintin.

The Captain of the Guard begged Miranda to come down into the garden
where the King was enjoying the fresh air, and when they got there, he
pretended to search for him, but as he was not to be found, he said:

"No doubt his Majesty has strolled into the forest," and he opened the
little door that led to it and they went through.

By this time the daylight had begun to appear, and the Princess, looking
at her conductor, saw that he had tears in his eyes and seemed too sad
to speak.

"What is the matter?" she said in the kindest way. "You seem very
sorrowful."

"Alas! Princess," he answered, "who would not be sorrowful who was
ordered to do such a terrible thing as I am? The King has commanded me
to kill you here, and carry your heart and your tongue to him, and if I
disobey I shall lose my life."

The poor Princess was terrified, she grew very pale and began to cry
softly.

Looking up at the Captain of the Guard with her beautiful eyes, she said
gently:

"Will you really have the heart to kill me? I have never done you any
harm, and have always spoken well of you to the King. If I had deserved
my father's anger I would suffer without a murmur, but, alas! he is
unjust to complain of me, when I have always treated him with love and
respect."

"Fear nothing, Princess," said the Captain of the Guard. "I would far
rather die myself than hurt you; but even if I am killed you will not
be safe: we must find some way of making the King believe that you are
dead."

"What can we do?" said Miranda; "unless you take him my heart and my
tongue he will never believe you."

The Princess and the Captain of the Guard were talking so earnestly that
they did not think of Patypata, but she had overheard all they said, and
now came and threw herself at Miranda's feet.

"Madam," she said, "I offer you my life; let me be killed, I shall be
only too happy to die for such a kind mistress."

"Why, Patypata," cried the Princess, kissing her, "that would never do;
your life is as precious to me as my own, especially after such a proof
of your affection as you have just given me."

"You are right, Princess," said Grabugeon, coming forward, "to love such
a faithful slave as Patypata; she is of more use to you than I am, I
offer you my tongue and my heart most willingly, especially as I wish to
make a great name for myself in Goblin Land."

"No, no, my little Grabugeon," replied Miranda, "I cannot bear the
thought of taking your life."

"Such a good little dog as I am," cried Tintin, "could not think of
letting either of you die for his mistress. If anyone is to die for her
it must be me."

And then began a great dispute between Patypata, Grabugeon, and Tintin,
and they came to high words, until at last Grabugeon, who was quicker
than the others, ran up to the very top of the nearest tree, and let
herself fall, head first, to the ground, and there she lay--quite dead!

The Princess was very sorry, but as Grabugeon was really dead, she
allowed the Captain of the Guard to take her tongue; but, alas! it
was such a little one--not bigger than the Princess's thumb--that they
decided sorrowfully that it was of no use at all: the King would not
have been taken in by it for a moment!

"Alas! my little monkey," cried the Princess, "I have lost you, and yet
I am no better off than I was before."

"The honor of saving your life is to be mine," interrupted Patypata,
and, before they could prevent her, she had picked up a knife and cut
her head off in an instant.

But when the Captain of the Guard would have taken her tongue it turned
out to be quite black, so that would not have deceived the King either.

"Am I not unlucky?" cried the poor Princess; "I lose everything I love,
and am none the better for it."

"If you had accepted my offer," said Tintin, "you would only have had me
to regret, and I should have had all your gratitude."

Miranda kissed her little dog, crying so bitterly, that at last she
could bear it no longer, and turned away into the forest. When she
looked back the Captain of the Guard was gone, and she was alone, except
for Patypata, Grabugeon, and Tintin, who lay upon the ground. She could
not leave the place until she had buried them in a pretty little mossy
grave at the foot of a tree, and she wrote their names upon the bark of
the tree, and how they had all died to save her life. And then she began
to think where she could go for safety--for this forest was so close to
her father's castle that she might be seen and recognized by the first
passer-by, and, besides that, it was full of lions and wolves, who would
have snapped up a princess just as soon as a stray chicken. So she began
to walk as fast as she could, but the forest was so large and the sun
was so hot that she nearly died of heat and terror and fatigue; look
which way she would there seemed to be no end to the forest, and she
was so frightened that she fancied every minute that she heard the King
running after her to kill her. You may imagine how miserable she was,
and how she cried as she went on, not knowing which path to follow, and
with the thorny bushes scratching her dreadfully and tearing her pretty
frock to pieces.

At last she heard the bleating of a sheep, and said to herself:

"No doubt there are shepherds here with their flocks; they will show me
the way to some village where I can live disguised as a peasant girl.
Alas! it is not always kings and princes who are the happiest people in
the world. Who could have believed that I should ever be obliged to run
away and hide because the King, for no reason at all, wishes to kill
me?"

So saying she advanced toward the place where she heard the bleating,
but what was her surprise when, in a lovely little glade quite
surrounded by trees, she saw a large sheep; its wool was as white as
snow, and its horns shone like gold; it had a garland of flowers round
its neck, and strings of great pearls about its legs, and a collar of
diamonds; it lay upon a bank of orange-flowers, under a canopy of cloth
of gold which protected it from the heat of the sun. Nearly a hundred
other sheep were scattered about, not eating the grass, but some
drinking coffee, lemonade, or sherbet, others eating ices, strawberries
and cream, or sweetmeats, while others, again, were playing games. Many
of them wore golden collars with jewels, flowers, and ribbons.

Miranda stopped short in amazement at this unexpected sight, and was
looking in all directions for the shepherd of this surprising flock,
when the beautiful sheep came bounding toward her.

"Approach, lovely Princess," he cried; "have no fear of such gentle and
peaceable animals as we are."

"What a marvel!" cried the Princess, starting back a little. "Here is a
sheep that can talk."

"Your monkey and your dog could talk, madam," said he; "are you more
astonished at us than at them?"

"A fairy gave them the power to speak," replied Miranda. "So I was used
to them."

"Perhaps the same thing has happened to us," he said, smiling
sheepishly. "But, Princess, what can have led you here?"

"A thousand misfortunes, Sir Sheep," she answered.

"I am the unhappiest princess in the world, and I am seeking a shelter
against my father's anger."

"Come with me, madam," said the Sheep; "I offer you a hiding-place which
you only will know of, and where you will be mistress of everything you
see."

"I really cannot follow you," said Miranda, "for I am too tired to walk
another step."

The Sheep with the golden horns ordered that his chariot should be
fetched, and a moment after appeared six goats, harnessed to a pumpkin,
which was so big that two people could quite well sit in it, and was all
lined with cushions of velvet and down. The Princess stepped into it,
much amused at such a new kind of carriage, the King of the Sheep took
his place beside her, and the goats ran away with them at full speed,
and only stopped when they reached a cavern, the entrance to which
was blocked by a great stone. This the King touched with his foot, and
immediately it fell down, and he invited the Princess to enter without
fear. Now, if she had not been so alarmed by everything that had
happened, nothing could have induced her to go into this frightful cave,
but she was so afraid of what might be behind her that she would have
thrown herself even down a well at this moment. So, without hesitation,
she followed the Sheep, who went before her, down, down, down, until she
thought they must come out at the other side of the world--indeed, she
was not sure that he wasn't leading her into Fairyland. At last she saw
before her a great plain, quite covered with all sorts of flowers, the
scent of which seemed to her nicer than anything she had ever smelled
before; a broad river of orange-flower water flowed round it and
fountains of wine of every kind ran in all directions and made the
prettiest little cascades and brooks. The plain was covered with the
strangest trees, there were whole avenues where partridges, ready
roasted, hung from every branch, or, if you preferred pheasants, quails,
turkeys, or rabbits, you had only to turn to the right hand or to the
left and you were sure to find them. In places the air was darkened by
showers of lobster-patties, white puddings, sausages, tarts, and all
sorts of sweetmeats, or with pieces of gold and silver, diamonds and
pearls. This unusual kind of rain, and the pleasantness of the whole
place, would, no doubt, have attracted numbers of people to it, if the
King of the Sheep had been of a more sociable disposition, but from all
accounts it is evident that he was as grave as a judge.

As it was quite the nicest time of the year when Miranda arrived in this
delightful land the only palace she saw was a long row of orange trees,
jasmines, honeysuckles, and musk-roses, and their interlacing branches
made the prettiest rooms possible, which were hung with gold and silver
gauze, and had great mirrors and candlesticks, and most beautiful
pictures. The Wonderful Sheep begged that the Princess would consider
herself queen over all that she saw, and assured her that, though for
some years he had been very sad and in great trouble, she had it in her
power to make him forget all his grief.

"You are so kind and generous, noble Sheep," said the Princess, "that I
cannot thank you enough, but I must confess that all I see here seems to
me so extraordinary that I don't know what to think of it."

As she spoke a band of lovely fairies came up and offered her amber
baskets full of fruit, but when she held out her hands to them they
glided away, and she could feel nothing when she tried to touch them.

"Oh!" she cried, "what can they be? Whom am I with?" and she began to
cry.

At this instant the King of the Sheep came back to her, and was so
distracted to find her in tears that he could have torn his wool.

"What is the matter, lovely Princess?" he cried. "Has anyone failed to
treat you with due respect?"

"Oh! no," said Miranda; "only I am not used to living with sprites and
with sheep that talk, and everything here frightens me. It was very kind
of you to bring me to this place, but I shall be even more grateful to
you if you will take me up into the world again."

"Do not be afraid," said the Wonderful Sheep; "I entreat you to have
patience, and listen to the story of my misfortunes. I was once a king,
and my kingdom was the most splendid in the world. My subjects loved me,
my neighbors envied and feared me. I was respected by everyone, and it
was said that no king ever deserved it more.

"I was very fond of hunting, and one day, while chasing a stag, I left
my attendants far behind; suddenly I saw the animal leap into a pool of
water, and I rashly urged my horse to follow it, but before we had gone
many steps I felt an extraordinary heat, instead of the coolness of the
water; the pond dried up, a great gulf opened before me, out of which
flames of fire shot up, and I fell helplessly to the bottom of a
precipice.

"I gave myself up for lost, but presently a voice said: 'Ungrateful
Prince, even this fire is hardly enough to warm your cold heart!'

"'Who complains of my coldness in this dismal place?' I cried.

"'An unhappy being who loves you hopelessly,' replied the voice, and at
the same moment the flames began to flicker and cease to burn, and I
saw a fairy, whom I had known as long as I could remember, and whose
ugliness had always horrified me. She was leaning upon the arm of a
most beautiful young girl, who wore chains of gold on her wrists and was
evidently her slave.

"'Why, Ragotte,' I said, for that was the fairy's name, 'what is the
meaning of all this? Is it by your orders that I am here?'

"'And whose fault is it,' she answered, 'that you have never understood
me until now? Must a powerful fairy like myself condescend to explain
her doings to you who are no better than an ant by comparison, though
you think yourself a great king?'

"'Call me what you like,' I said impatiently; 'but what is it that you
want--my crown, or my cities, or my treasures?'

"'Treasures!' said the fairy, disdainfully. 'If I chose I could make
any one of my scullions richer and more powerful than you. I do not
want your treasures, but,' she added softly, 'if you will give me your
heart--if you will marry me--I will add twenty kingdoms to the one you
have already; you shall have a hundred castles full of gold and five
hundred full of silver, and, in short, anything you like to ask me for.'

"'Madam Ragotte,' said I, 'when one is at the bottom of a pit where one
has fully expected to be roasted alive, it is impossible to think of
asking such a charming person as you are to marry one! I beg that you
will set me at liberty, and then I shall hope to answer you fittingly.'

"'Ah!' said she, 'if you really loved me you would not care where you
were--a cave, a wood, a fox-hole, a desert, would please you equally
well. Do not think that you can deceive me; you fancy you are going to
escape, but I assure you that you are going to stay here and the first
thing I shall give you to do will be to keep my sheep--they are very
good company and speak quite as well as you do.

"As she spoke she advanced, and led me to this plain where we now stand,
and showed me her flock, but I paid little attention to it or to her.

"To tell the truth, I was so lost in admiration of her beautiful slave
that I forgot everything else, and the cruel Ragotte, perceiving this,
turned upon her so furious and terrible a look that she fell lifeless to
the ground.

"At this dreadful sight I drew my sword and rushed at Ragotte, and
should certainly have cut off her head had she not by her magic arts
chained me to the spot on which I stood; all my efforts to move were
useless, and at last, when I threw myself down on the ground in despair,
she said to me, with a scornful smile:

"'I intend to make you feel my power. It seems that you are a lion at
present, I mean you to be a sheep.'

"So saying, she touched me with her wand, and I became what you see. I
did not lose the power of speech, or of feeling the misery of my present
state.

"'For five years,' she said, 'you shall be a sheep, and lord of this
pleasant land, while I, no longer able to see your face, which I loved
so much, shall be better able to hate you as you deserve to be hated.'

"She disappeared as she finished speaking, and if I had not been too
unhappy to care about anything I should have been glad that she was
gone.

"The talking sheep received me as their king, and told me that they,
too, were unfortunate princes who had, in different ways, offended the
revengeful fairy, and had been added to her flock for a certain number
of years; some more, some less. From time to time, indeed, one regains
his own proper form and goes back again to his place in the upper world;
but the other beings whom you saw are the rivals or the enemies of
Ragotte, whom she has imprisoned for a hundred years or so; though even
they will go back at last. The young slave of whom I told you about is
one of these; I have seen her often, and it has been a great pleasure to
me. She never speaks to me, and if I were nearer to her I know I should
find her only a shadow, which would be very annoying. However, I noticed
that one of my companions in misfortune was also very attentive to this
little sprite, and I found out that he had been her lover, whom the
cruel Ragotte had taken away from her long before; since then I have
cared for, and thought of, nothing but how I might regain my freedom.
I have often been in the forest; that is where I have seen you, lovely
Princess, sometimes driving your chariot, which you did with all the
grace and skill in the world; sometimes riding to the chase on so
spirited a horse that it seemed as if no one but yourself could have
managed it, and sometimes running races on the plain with the Princesses
of your Court--running so lightly that it was you always who won the
prize. Oh! Princess, I have loved you so long, and yet how dare I
tell you of my love! what hope can there be for an unhappy sheep like
myself?"

Miranda was so surprised and confused by all that she had heard that
she hardly knew what answer to give to the King of the Sheep, but she
managed to make some kind of little speech, which certainly did not
forbid him to hope, and said that she should not be afraid of the
shadows now she knew that they would some day come to life again.
"Alas!" she continued, "if my poor Patypata, my dear Grabugeon, and
pretty little Tintin, who all died for my sake, were equally well off, I
should have nothing left to wish for here!"

Prisoner though he was, the King of the Sheep had still some powers and
privileges.

"Go," said he to his Master of the Horse, "go and seek the shadows of
the little black girl, the monkey, and the dog: they will amuse our
Princess."

And an instant afterward Miranda saw them coming toward her, and their
presence gave her the greatest pleasure, though they did not come near
enough for her to touch them.

The King of the Sheep was so kind and amusing, and loved Miranda so
dearly, that at last she began to love him too. Such a handsome
sheep, who was so polite and considerate, could hardly fail to please,
especially if one knew that he was really a king, and that his strange
imprisonment would soon come to an end. So the Princess's days passed
very gaily while she waited for the happy time to come. The King of
the Sheep, with the help of all the flock, got up balls, concerts, and
hunting parties, and even the shadows joined in all the fun, and came,
making believe to be their own real selves.

One evening, when the couriers arrived (for the King sent most carefully
for news--and they always brought the very best kinds), it was announced
that the sister of the Princess Miranda was going to be married to
a great Prince, and that nothing could be more splendid than all the
preparations for the wedding.

"Ah!" cried the young Princess, "how unlucky I am to miss the sight of
so many pretty things! Here am I imprisoned under the earth, with no
company but sheep and shadows, while my sister is to be adorned like a
queen and surrounded by all who love and admire her, and everyone but
myself can go to wish her joy!"

"Why do you complain, Princess?" said the King of the Sheep. "Did I say
that you were not to go to the wedding? Set out as soon as you please;
only promise me that you will come back, for I love you too much to be
able to live without you."

Miranda was very grateful to him, and promised faithfully that nothing
in the world should keep her from coming back. The King caused an escort
suitable to her rank to be got ready for her, and she dressed herself
splendidly, not forgetting anything that could make her more beautiful.
Her chariot was of mother-of-pearl, drawn by six dun-colored griffins
just brought from the other side of the world, and she was attended by a
number of guards in splendid uniforms, who were all at least eight feet
high and had come from far and near to ride in the Princess's train.

Miranda reached her father's palace just as the wedding ceremony began,
and everyone, as soon as she came in, was struck with surprise at
her beauty and the splendor of her jewels. She heard exclamations
of admiration on all sides; and the King her father looked at her so
attentively that she was afraid he must recognize her; but he was so
sure that she was dead that the idea never occurred to him.

However, the fear of not getting away made her leave before the marriage
was over. She went out hastily, leaving behind her a little coral casket
set with emeralds. On it was written in diamond letters: "Jewels for the
Bride," and when they opened it, which they did as soon as it was found,
there seemed to be no end to the pretty things it contained. The King,
who had hoped to join the unknown Princess and find out who she was,
was dreadfully disappointed when she disappeared so suddenly, and gave
orders that if she ever came again the doors were to be shut that she
might not get away so easily. Short as Miranda's absence had been, it
had seemed like a hundred years to the King of the Sheep. He was waiting
for her by a fountain in the thickest part of the forest, and the ground
was strewn with splendid presents which he had prepared for her to show
his joy and gratitude at her coming back.

As soon as she was in sight he rushed to meet her, leaping and bounding
like a real sheep. He caressed her tenderly, throwing himself at her
feet and kissing her hands, and told her how uneasy he had been in
her absence, and how impatient for her return, with an eloquence which
charmed her.

After some time came the news that the King's second daughter was going
to be married. When Miranda heard it she begged the King of the Sheep
to allow her to go and see the wedding as before. This request made him
feel very sad, as if some misfortune must surely come of it, but his
love for the Princess being stronger than anything else he did not like
to refuse her.

"You wish to leave me, Princess," said he; "it is my unhappy fate--you
are not to blame. I consent to your going, but, believe me, I can give
you no stronger proof of my love than by so doing."

The Princess assured him that she would only stay a very short time, as
she had done before, and begged him not to be uneasy, as she would be
quite as much grieved if anything detained her as he could possibly be.

So, with the same escort, she set out, and reached the palace as the
marriage ceremony began. Everybody was delighted to see her; she was
so pretty that they thought she must be some fairy princess, and the
Princes who were there could not take their eyes off her.

The King was more glad than anyone else that she had come again, and
gave orders that the doors should all be shut and bolted that very
minute. When the wedding was all but over the Princess got up quickly,
hoping to slip away unnoticed among the crowd, but, to her great dismay,
she found every door fastened.

She felt more at ease when the King came up to her, and with the
greatest respect begged her not to run away so soon, but at least to
honor him by staying for the splendid feast which was prepared for the
Princes and Princesses. He led her into a magnificent hall, where all
the Court was assembled, and himself taking up the golden bowl full of
water, he offered it to her that she might dip her pretty fingers into
it.

At this the Princess could no longer contain herself; throwing herself
at the King's feet, she cried out:

"My dream has come true after all--you have offered me water to wash my
hands on my sister's wedding day, and it has not vexed you to do it."

The King recognized her at once--indeed, he had already thought several
times how much like his poor little Miranda she was.

"Oh! my dear daughter," he cried, kissing her, "can you ever forget my
cruelty? I ordered you to be put to death because I thought your dream
portended the loss of my crown. And so it did," he added, "for now your
sisters are both married and have kingdoms of their own--and mine shall
be for you." So saying he put his crown on the Princess's head and
cried:

"Long live Queen Miranda!"

All the Court cried: "Long live Queen Miranda!" after him, and the young
Queen's two sisters came running up, and threw their arms round her
neck, and kissed her a thousand times, and then there was such a
laughing and crying, talking and kissing, all at once, and Miranda
thanked her father, and began to ask after everyone--particularly
the Captain of the Guard, to whom she owed so much; but, to her great
sorrow, she heard that he was dead. Presently they sat down to the
banquet, and the King asked Miranda to tell them all that had happened
to her since the terrible morning when he had sent the Captain of the
Guard to fetch her. This she did with so much spirit that all the guests
listened with breathless interest. But while she was thus enjoying
herself with the King and her sisters, the King of the Sheep was waiting
impatiently for the time of her return, and when it came and went, and
no Princess appeared, his anxiety became so great that he could bear it
no longer.

"She is not coming back any more," he cried. "My miserable sheep's
face displeases her, and without Miranda what is left to me, wretched
creature that I am! Oh! cruel Ragotte; my punishment is complete."

For a long time he bewailed his sad fate like this, and then, seeing
that it was growing dark, and that still there was no sign of the
Princess, he set out as fast as he could in the direction of the town.
When he reached the palace he asked for Miranda, but by this time
everyone had heard the story of her adventures, and did not want her to
go back again to the King of the Sheep, so they refused sternly to let
him see her. In vain he begged and prayed them to let him in; though
his entreaties might have melted hearts of stone they did not move the
guards of the palace, and at last, quite broken-hearted, he fell dead at
their feet.

In the meantime the King, who had not the least idea of the sad thing
that was happening outside the gate of his palace, proposed to Miranda
that she should be driven in her chariot all round the town, which was
to be illuminated with thousands and thousands of torches, placed in
windows and balconies, and in all the grand squares. But what a sight
met her eyes at the very entrance of the palace! There lay her dear,
kind sheep, silent and motionless, upon the pavement!

She threw herself out of the chariot and ran to him, crying bitterly,
for she realized that her broken promise had cost him his life, and for
a long, long time she was so unhappy that they thought she would have
died too.

So you see that even a princess is not always happy--especially if she
forgets to keep her word; and the greatest misfortunes often happen to
people just as they think they have obtained their heart's desires!(1)


(1) Madame d'Aulnoy.




LITTLE THUMB


There was, once upon a time, a man and his wife fagot-makers by trade,
who had several children, all boys. The eldest was but ten years old,
and the youngest only seven.

They were very poor, and their seven children incommoded them greatly,
because not one of them was able to earn his bread. That which gave
them yet more uneasiness was that the youngest was of a very puny
constitution, and scarce ever spoke a word, which made them take that
for stupidity which was a sign of good sense. He was very little, and
when born no bigger than one's thumb, which made him be called Little
Thumb.

The poor child bore the blame of whatsoever was done amiss in the house,
and, guilty or not, was always in the wrong; he was, notwithstanding,
more cunning and had a far greater share of wisdom than all his brothers
put together; and, if he spake little, he heard and thought the more.

There happened now to come a very bad year, and the famine was so great
that these poor people resolved to rid themselves of their children. One
evening, when they were all in bed and the fagot-maker was sitting with
his wife at the fire, he said to her, with his heart ready to burst with
grief:

"Thou seest plainly that we are not able to keep our children, and I
cannot see them starve to death before my face; I am resolved to lose
them in the wood to-morrow, which may very easily be done; for, while
they are busy in tying up fagots, we may run away, and leave them,
without their taking any notice."

"Ah!" cried his wife; "and canst thou thyself have the heart to take thy
children out along with thee on purpose to lose them?"

In vain did her husband represent to her their extreme poverty: she
would not consent to it; she was indeed poor, but she was their mother.
However, having considered what a grief it would be to her to see them
perish with hunger, she at last consented, and went to bed all in tears.

Little Thumb heard every word that had been spoken; for observing, as
he lay in his bed, that they were talking very busily, he got up softly,
and hid himself under his father's stool, that he might hear what they
said without being seen. He went to bed again, but did not sleep a wink
all the rest of the night, thinking on what he had to do. He got up
early in the morning, and went to the river-side, where he filled his
pockets full of small white pebbles, and then returned home.

They all went abroad, but Little Thumb never told his brothers one
syllable of what he knew. They went into a very thick forest, where they
could not see one another at ten paces distance. The fagot-maker began
to cut wood, and the children to gather up the sticks to make fagots.
Their father and mother, seeing them busy at their work, got away from
them insensibly, and ran away from them all at once, along a by-way
through the winding bushes.

When the children saw they were left alone, they began to cry as loud as
they could. Little Thumb let them cry on, knowing very well how to get
home again, for, as he came, he took care to drop all along the way the
little white pebbles he had in his pockets. Then he said to them:

"Be not afraid, brothers; father and mother have left us here, but I
will lead you home again, only follow me."

They did so, and he brought them home by the very same way they came
into the forest. They dared not go in, but sat themselves down at the
door, listening to what their father and mother were saying.

The very moment the fagot-maker and his wife reached home the lord of
the manor sent them ten crowns, which he had owed them a long while, and
which they never expected. This gave them new life, for the poor people
were almost famished. The fagot-maker sent his wife immediately to the
butcher's. As it was a long while since they had eaten a bit, she bought
thrice as much meat as would sup two people. When they had eaten, the
woman said:

"Alas! where are now our poor children? they would make a good feast of
what we have left here; but it was you, William, who had a mind to lose
them: I told you we should repent of it. What are they now doing in the
forest? Alas! dear God, the wolves have perhaps already eaten them up;
thou art very inhuman thus to have lost thy children."

The fagot-maker grew at last quite out of patience, for she repeated it
above twenty times, that they should repent of it, and that she was in
the right of it for so saying. He threatened to beat her if she did not
hold her tongue. It was not that the fagot-maker was not, perhaps, more
vexed than his wife, but that she teased him, and that he was of the
humor of a great many others, who love wives to speak well, but
think those very importunate who are continually doing so. She was
half-drowned in tears, crying out:

"Alas! where are now my children, my poor children?"

She spoke this so very loud that the children, who were at the gate,
began to cry out all together:

"Here we are! Here we are!"

She ran immediately to open the door, and said, hugging them:

"I am glad to see you, my dear children; you are very hungry and weary;
and my poor Peter, thou art horribly bemired; come in and let me clean
thee."

Now, you must know that Peter was her eldest son, whom she loved above
all the rest, because he was somewhat carroty, as she herself was. They
sat down to supper, and ate with such a good appetite as pleased both
father and mother, whom they acquainted how frightened they were in
the forest, speaking almost always all together. The good folks were
extremely glad to see their children once more at home, and this joy
continued while the ten crowns lasted; but, when the money was all gone,
they fell again into their former uneasiness, and resolved to lose them
again; and, that they might be the surer of doing it, to carry them to a
much greater distance than before.

They could not talk of this so secretly but they were overheard by
Little Thumb, who made account to get out of this difficulty as well as
the former; but, though he got up very early in the morning to go and
pick up some little pebbles, he was disappointed, for he found the
house-door double-locked, and was at a stand what to do. When their
father had given each of them a piece of bread for their breakfast,
Little Thumb fancied he might make use of this instead of the pebbles by
throwing it in little bits all along the way they should pass; and so he
put the bread in his pocket.

Their father and mother brought them into the thickest and most obscure
part of the forest, when, stealing away into a by-path, they there left
them. Little Thumb was not very uneasy at it, for he thought he could
easily find the way again by means of his bread, which he had scattered
all along as he came; but he was very much surprised when he could not
find so much as one crumb; the birds had come and had eaten it up, every
bit. They were now in great affliction, for the farther they went the
more they were out of their way, and were more and more bewildered in
the forest.

Night now came on, and there arose a terribly high wind, which made them
dreadfully afraid. They fancied they heard on every side of them the
howling of wolves coming to eat them up. They scarce dared to speak or
turn their heads. After this, it rained very hard, which wetted them to
the skin; their feet slipped at every step they took, and they fell into
the mire, whence they got up in a very dirty pickle; their hands were
quite benumbed.

Little Thumb climbed up to the top of a tree, to see if he could
discover anything; and having turned his head about on every side, he
saw at last a glimmering light, like that of a candle, but a long way
from the forest. He came down, and, when upon the ground, he could see
it no more, which grieved him sadly. However, having walked for some
time with his brothers toward that side on which he had seen the light,
he perceived it again as he came out of the wood.

They came at last to the house where this candle was, not without an
abundance of fear: for very often they lost sight of it, which happened
every time they came into a bottom. They knocked at the door, and a good
woman came and opened it; she asked them what they would have.

Little Thumb told her they were poor children who had been lost in the
forest, and desired to lodge there for God's sake.

The woman, seeing them so very pretty, began to weep, and said to them:

"Alas! poor babies; whither are ye come? Do ye know that this house
belongs to a cruel ogre who eats up little children?"

"Ah! dear madam," answered Little Thumb (who trembled every joint of
him, as well as his brothers), "what shall we do? To be sure the wolves
of the forest will devour us to-night if you refuse us to lie here; and
so we would rather the gentleman should eat us; and perhaps he may take
pity upon us, especially if you please to beg it of him."

The Ogre's wife, who believed she could conceal them from her husband
till morning, let them come in, and brought them to warm themselves at a
very good fire; for there was a whole sheep upon the spit, roasting for
the Ogre's supper.

As they began to be a little warm they heard three or four great raps at
the door; this was the Ogre, who had come home. Upon this she hid them
under the bed and went to open the door. The Ogre presently asked if
supper was ready and the wine drawn, and then sat himself down to table.
The sheep was as yet all raw and bloody; but he liked it the better for
that. He sniffed about to the right and left, saying:

"I smell fresh meat."

"What you smell so," said his wife, "must be the calf which I have just
now killed and flayed."

"I smell fresh meat, I tell thee once more," replied the Ogre, looking
crossly at his wife; "and there is something here which I do not
understand."

As he spoke these words he got up from the table and went directly to
the bed.

"Ah, ah!" said he; "I see then how thou wouldst cheat me, thou cursed
woman; I know not why I do not eat thee up too, but it is well for thee
that thou art a tough old carrion. Here is good game, which comes very
quickly to entertain three ogres of my acquaintance who are to pay me a
visit in a day or two."

With that he dragged them out from under the bed one by one. The poor
children fell upon their knees, and begged his pardon; but they had to
do with one of the most cruel ogres in the world, who, far from having
any pity on them, had already devoured them with his eyes, and told
his wife they would be delicate eating when tossed up with good
savory sauce. He then took a great knife, and, coming up to these poor
children, whetted it upon a great whet-stone which he held in his left
hand. He had already taken hold of one of them when his wife said to
him:

"Why need you do it now? Is it not time enough to-morrow?"

"Hold your prating," said the Ogre; "they will eat the tenderer.

"But you have so much meat already," replied his wife, "you have no
occasion; here are a calf, two sheep, and half a hog."

"That is true," said the Ogre; "give them their belly full that they may
not fall away, and put them to bed."

The good woman was overjoyed at this, and gave them a good supper; but
they were so much afraid they could not eat a bit. As for the Ogre,
he sat down again to drink, being highly pleased that he had got
wherewithal to treat his friends. He drank a dozen glasses more than
ordinary, which got up into his head and obliged him to go to bed.

The Ogre had seven daughters, all little children, and these young
ogresses had all of them very fine complexions, because they used to
eat fresh meat like their father; but they had little gray eyes, quite
round, hooked noses, and very long sharp teeth, standing at a
good distance from each other. They were not as yet over and above
mischievous, but they promised very fair for it, for they had already
bitten little children, that they might suck their blood.

They had been put to bed early, with every one a crown of gold upon her
head. There was in the same chamber a bed of the like bigness, and it
was into this bed the Ogre's wife put the seven little boys, after which
she went to bed to her husband.

Little Thumb, who had observed that the Ogre's daughters had crowns of
gold upon their heads, and was afraid lest the Ogre should repent his
not killing them, got up about midnight, and, taking his brothers'
bonnets and his own, went very softly and put them upon the heads of
the seven little ogresses, after having taken off their crowns of gold,
which he put upon his own head and his brothers', that the Ogre might
take them for his daughters, and his daughters for the little boys whom
he wanted to kill.

All this succeeded according to his desire; for, the Ogre waking about
midnight, and sorry that he deferred to do that till morning which
he might have done over-night, threw himself hastily out of bed, and,
taking his great knife,

"Let us see," said he, "how our little rogues do, and not make two jobs
of the matter."

He then went up, groping all the way, into his daughters' chamber, and,
coming to the bed where the little boys lay, and who were every soul of
them fast asleep, except Little Thumb, who was terribly afraid when
he found the Ogre fumbling about his head, as he had done about his
brothers', the Ogre, feeling the golden crowns, said:

"I should have made a fine piece of work of it, truly; I find I drank
too much last night."

Then he went to the bed where the girls lay; and, having found the boys'
little bonnets,

"Ah!" said he, "my merry lads, are you there? Let us work as we ought."

And saying these words, without more ado, he cut the throats of all his
seven daughters.

Well pleased with what he had done, he went to bed again to his wife.
So soon as Little Thumb heard the Ogre snore, he waked his brothers, and
bade them all put on their clothes presently and follow him. They stole
down softly into the garden, and got over the wall. They kept running
about all night, and trembled all the while, without knowing which way
they went.

The Ogre, when he awoke, said to his wife: "Go upstairs and dress those
young rascals who came here last night."

The wife was very much surprised at this goodness of her husband, not
dreaming after what manner she should dress them; but, thinking that
he had ordered her to go and put on their clothes, she went up, and was
strangely astonished when she perceived her seven daughters killed, and
weltering in their blood.

She fainted away, for this is the first expedient almost all women find
in such cases. The Ogre, fearing his wife would be too long in doing
what he had ordered, went up himself to help her. He was no less amazed
than his wife at this frightful spectacle.

"Ah! what have I done?" cried he. "The wretches shall pay for it, and
that instantly."

He threw a pitcher of water upon his wife's face, and, having brought
her to herself, said:

"Give me quickly my boots of seven leagues, that I may go and catch
them."

He went out, and, having run over a vast deal of ground, both on
this side and that, he came at last into the very road where the poor
children were, and not above a hundred paces from their father's house.
They espied the Ogre, who went at one step from mountain to mountain,
and over rivers as easily as the narrowest kennels. Little Thumb, seeing
a hollow rock near the place where they were, made his brothers hide
themselves in it, and crowded into it himself, minding always what would
become of the Ogre.

The Ogre, who found himself much tired with his long and fruitless
journey (for these boots of seven leagues greatly fatigued the wearer),
had a great mind to rest himself, and, by chance, went to sit down upon
the rock where the little boys had hid themselves. As it was impossible
he could be more weary than he was, he fell asleep, and, after reposing
himself some time, began to snore so frightfully that the poor children
were no less afraid of him than when he held up his great knife and was
going to cut their throats. Little Thumb was not so much frightened as
his brothers, and told them that they should run away immediately toward
home while the Ogre was asleep so soundly, and that they should not be
in any pain about him. They took his advice, and got home presently.
Little Thumb came up to the Ogre, pulled off his boots gently and put
them on his own legs. The boots were very long and large, but, as they
were fairies, they had the gift of becoming big and little, according to
the legs of those who wore them; so that they fitted his feet and legs
as well as if they had been made on purpose for him. He went immediately
to the Ogre's house, where he saw his wife crying bitterly for the loss
of the Ogre's murdered daughters.

"Your husband," said Little Thumb, "is in very great danger, being taken
by a gang of thieves, who have sworn to kill him if he does not give
them all his gold and silver. The very moment they held their daggers
at his throat he perceived me, and desired me to come and tell you the
condition he is in, and that you should give me whatsoever he has of
value, without retaining any one thing; for otherwise they will kill him
without mercy; and, as his case is very pressing, he desired me to make
use (you see I have them on) of his boots, that I might make the more
haste and to show you that I do not impose upon you."

The good woman, being sadly frightened, gave him all she had: for this
Ogre was a very good husband, though he used to eat up little children.
Little Thumb, having thus got all the Ogre's money, came home to his
father's house, where he was received with abundance of joy.

There are many people who do not agree in this circumstance, and pretend
that Little Thumb never robbed the Ogre at all, and that he only thought
he might very justly, and with a safe conscience, take off his boots
of seven leagues, because he made no other use of them but to run after
little children. These folks affirm that they are very well assured of
this, and the more as having drunk and eaten often at the fagot-maker's
house. They aver that when Little Thumb had taken off the Ogre's boots
he went to Court, where he was informed that they were very much in pain
about a certain army, which was two hundred leagues off, and the success
of a battle. He went, say they, to the King, and told him that, if he
desired it, he would bring him news from the army before night.

The King promised him a great sum of money upon that condition. Little
Thumb was as good as his word, and returned that very same night with
the news; and, this first expedition causing him to be known, he got
whatever he pleased, for the King paid him very well for carrying his
orders to the army. After having for some time carried on the business
of a messenger, and gained thereby great wealth, he went home to his
father, where it was impossible to express the joy they were all in at
his return. He made the whole family very easy, bought places for his
father and brothers, and, by that means, settled them very handsomely in
the world, and, in the meantime, made his court to perfection.(1)


(1) Charles Perrault.




THE FORTY THIEVES


In a town in Persia there dwelt two brothers, one named Cassim, the
other Ali Baba. Cassim was married to a rich wife and lived in plenty,
while Ali Baba had to maintain his wife and children by cutting wood in
a neighboring forest and selling it in the town. One day, when Ali Baba
was in the forest, he saw a troop of men on horseback, coming toward him
in a cloud of dust. He was afraid they were robbers, and climbed into
a tree for safety. When they came up to him and dismounted, he counted
forty of them. They unbridled their horses and tied them to trees. The
finest man among them, whom Ali Baba took to be their captain, went a
little way among some bushes, and said: "Open, Sesame!"(1) so plainly
that Ali Baba heard him. A door opened in the rocks, and having made the
troop go in, he followed them, and the door shut again of itself. They
stayed some time inside, and Ali Baba, fearing they might come out and
catch him, was forced to sit patiently in the tree. At last the door
opened again, and the Forty Thieves came out. As the Captain went in
last he came out first, and made them all pass by him; he then closed
the door, saying: "Shut, Sesame!" Every man bridled his horse and
mounted, the Captain put himself at their head, and they returned as
they came.


(1) Sesame is a kind of grain.


Then Ali Baba climbed down and went to the door concealed among the
bushes, and said: "Open, Sesame!" and it flew open. Ali Baba, who
expected a dull, dismal place, was greatly surprised to find it large
and well lighted, hollowed by the hand of man in the form of a vault,
which received the light from an opening in the ceiling. He saw rich
bales of merchandise--silk, stuff-brocades, all piled together, and gold
and silver in heaps, and money in leather purses. He went in and the
door shut behind him. He did not look at the silver, but brought out as
many bags of gold as he thought his asses, which were browsing outside,
could carry, loaded them with the bags, and hid it all with fagots.
Using the words: "Shut, Sesame!" he closed the door and went home.

Then he drove his asses into the yard, shut the gates, carried the
money-bags to his wife, and emptied them out before her. He bade her
keep the secret, and he would go and bury the gold. "Let me first
measure it," said his wife. "I will go borrow a measure of someone,
while you dig the hole." So she ran to the wife of Cassim and borrowed a
measure. Knowing Ali Baba's poverty, the sister was curious to find out
what sort of grain his wife wished to measure, and artfully put some
suet at the bottom of the measure. Ali Baba's wife went home and set the
measure on the heap of gold, and filled it and emptied it often, to her
great content. She then carried it back to her sister, without noticing
that a piece of gold was sticking to it, which Cassim's wife perceived
directly her back was turned. She grew very curious, and said to Cassim
when he came home: "Cassim, your brother is richer than you. He does not
count his money, he measures it." He begged her to explain this riddle,
which she did by showing him the piece of money and telling him where
she found it. Then Cassim grew so envious that he could not sleep, and
went to his brother in the morning before sunrise. "Ali Baba," he said,
showing him the gold piece, "you pretend to be poor and yet you measure
gold." By this Ali Baba perceived that through his wife's folly Cassim
and his wife knew their secret, so he confessed all and offered Cassim a
share. "That I expect," said Cassim; "but I must know where to find the
treasure, otherwise I will discover all, and you will lose all." Ali
Baba, more out of kindness than fear, told him of the cave, and the very
words to use. Cassim left Ali Baba, meaning to be beforehand with him
and get the treasure for himself. He rose early next morning, and set
out with ten mules loaded with great chests. He soon found the place,
and the door in the rock. He said: "Open, Sesame!" and the door opened
and shut behind him. He could have feasted his eyes all day on the
treasures, but he now hastened to gather together as much of it as
possible; but when he was ready to go he could not remember what to say
for thinking of his great riches. Instead of "Sesame," he said: "Open,
Barley!" and the door remained fast. He named several different sorts of
grain, all but the right one, and the door still stuck fast. He was so
frightened at the danger he was in that he had as much forgotten the
word as if he had never heard it.

About noon the robbers returned to their cave, and saw Cassim's mules
roving about with great chests on their backs. This gave them the alarm;
they drew their sabres, and went to the door, which opened on their
Captain's saying: "Open, Sesame!" Cassim, who had heard the trampling of
their horses' feet, resolved to sell his life dearly, so when the door
opened he leaped out and threw the Captain down. In vain, however, for
the robbers with their sabres soon killed him. On entering the cave they
saw all the bags laid ready, and could not imagine how anyone had got in
without knowing their secret. They cut Cassim's body into four quarters,
and nailed them up inside the cave, in order to frighten anyone who
should venture in, and went away in search of more treasure.

As night drew on Cassim's wife grew very uneasy, and ran to her
brother-in-law, and told him where her husband had gone. Ali Baba did
his best to comfort her, and set out to the forest in search of Cassim.
The first thing he saw on entering the cave was his dead brother. Full
of horror, he put the body on one of his asses, and bags of gold on the
other two, and, covering all with some fagots, returned home. He drove
the two asses laden with gold into his own yard, and led the other to
Cassim's house. The door was opened by the slave Morgiana, whom he knew
to be both brave and cunning. Unloading the ass, he said to her: "This
is the body of your master, who has been murdered, but whom we must bury
as though he had died in his bed. I will speak with you again, but now
tell your mistress I am come." The wife of Cassim, on learning the fate
of her husband, broke out into cries and tears, but Ali Baba offered to
take her to live with him and his wife if she would promise to keep
his counsel and leave everything to Morgiana; whereupon she agreed, and
dried her eyes.

Morgiana, meanwhile, sought an apothecary and asked him for some
lozenges. "My poor master," she said, "can neither eat nor speak, and
no one knows what his distemper is." She carried home the lozenges and
returned next day weeping, and asked for an essence only given to those
just about to die. Thus, in the evening, no one was surprised to hear
the wretched shrieks and cries of Cassim's wife and Morgiana, telling
everyone that Cassim was dead. The day after Morgiana went to an old
cobbler near the gates of the town who opened his stall early, put a
piece of gold in his hand, and bade him follow her with his needle and
thread. Having bound his eyes with a handkerchief, she took him to the
room where the body lay, pulled off the bandage, and bade him sew the
quarters together, after which she covered his eyes again and led him
home. Then they buried Cassim, and Morgiana his slave followed him to
the grave, weeping and tearing her hair, while Cassim's wife stayed at
home uttering lamentable cries. Next day she went to live with Ali Baba,
who gave Cassim's shop to his eldest son.

The Forty Thieves, on their return to the cave, were much astonished to
find Cassim's body gone and some of their money-bags. "We are certainly
discovered," said the Captain, "and shall be undone if we cannot find
out who it is that knows our secret. Two men must have known it; we have
killed one, we must now find the other. To this end one of you who
is bold and artful must go into the city dressed as a traveler, and
discover whom we have killed, and whether men talk of the strange manner
of his death. If the messenger fails he must lose his life, lest we be
betrayed." One of the thieves started up and offered to do this, and
after the rest had highly commended him for his bravery he disguised
himself, and happened to enter the town at daybreak, just by Baba
Mustapha's stall. The thief bade him good-day, saying: "Honest man, how
can you possibly see to stitch at your age?" "Old as I am," replied the
cobbler, "I have very good eyes, and will you believe me when I tell you
that I sewed a dead body together in a place where I had less light than
I have now." The robber was overjoyed at his good fortune, and, giving
him a piece of gold, desired to be shown the house where he stitched
up the dead body. At first Mustapha refused, saying that he had been
blindfolded; but when the robber gave him another piece of gold he began
to think he might remember the turnings if blindfolded as before. This
means succeeded; the robber partly led him, and was partly guided by
him, right in front of Cassim's house, the door of which the robber
marked with a piece of chalk. Then, well pleased, he bade farewell to
Baba Mustapha and returned to the forest. By and by Morgiana, going out,
saw the mark the robber had made, quickly guessed that some mischief was
brewing, and fetching a piece of chalk marked two or three doors on each
side, without saying anything to her master or mistress.

The thief, meantime, told his comrades of his discovery. The Captain
thanked him, and bade him show him the house he had marked. But when
they came to it they saw that five or six of the houses were chalked
in the same manner. The guide was so confounded that he knew not what
answer to make, and when they returned he was at once beheaded for
having failed. Another robber was dispatched, and, having won over Baba
Mustapha, marked the house in red chalk; but Morgiana being again too
clever for them, the second messenger was put to death also. The Captain
now resolved to go himself, but, wiser than the others, he did not
mark the house, but looked at it so closely that he could not fail to
remember it. He returned, and ordered his men to go into the neighboring
villages and buy nineteen mules, and thirty-eight leather jars, all
empty except one, which was full of oil. The Captain put one of his men,
fully armed, into each, rubbing the outside of the jars with oil from
the full vessel. Then the nineteen mules were loaded with thirty-seven
robbers in jars, and the jar of oil, and reached the town by dusk. The
Captain stopped his mules in front of Ali Baba's house, and said to Ali
Baba, who was sitting outside for coolness: "I have brought some oil
from a distance to sell at to-morrow's market, but it is now so late
that I know not where to pass the night, unless you will do me the favor
to take me in." Though Ali Baba had seen the Captain of the robbers in
the forest, he did not recognize him in the disguise of an oil merchant.
He bade him welcome, opened his gates for the mules to enter, and
went to Morgiana to bid her prepare a bed and supper for his guest. He
brought the stranger into his hall, and after they had supped went again
to speak to Morgiana in the kitchen, while the Captain went into the
yard under pretense of seeing after his mules, but really to tell his
men what to do. Beginning at the first jar and ending at the last, he
said to each man: "As soon as I throw some stones from the window of the
chamber where I lie, cut the jars open with your knives and come out,
and I will be with you in a trice." He returned to the house,
and Morgiana led him to his chamber. She then told Abdallah, her
fellow-slave, to set on the pot to make some broth for her master, who
had gone to bed. Meanwhile her lamp went out, and she had no more oil in
the house. "Do not be uneasy," said Abdallah; "go into the yard and take
some out of one of those jars." Morgiana thanked him for his advice,
took the oil pot, and went into the yard. When she came to the first jar
the robber inside said softly: "Is it time?"

Any other slave but Morgiana, on finding a man in the jar instead of the
oil she wanted, would have screamed and made a noise; but she, knowing
the danger her master was in, bethought herself of a plan, and answered
quietly: "Not yet, but presently." She went to all the jars, giving
the same answer, till she came to the jar of oil. She now saw that her
master, thinking to entertain an oil merchant, had let thirty-eight
robbers into his house. She filled her oil pot, went back to the
kitchen, and, having lit her lamp, went again to the oil jar and filled
a large kettle full of oil. When it boiled she went and poured enough
oil into every jar to stifle and kill the robber inside. When this brave
deed was done she went back to the kitchen, put out the fire and the
lamp, and waited to see what would happen.

In a quarter of an hour the Captain of the robbers awoke, got up,
and opened the window. As all seemed quiet, he threw down some little
pebbles which hit the jars. He listened, and as none of his men seemed
to stir he grew uneasy, and went down into the yard. On going to the
first jar and saying, "Are you asleep?" he smelt the hot boiled oil, and
knew at once that his plot to murder Ali Baba and his household had been
discovered. He found all the gang was dead, and, missing the oil out of
the last jar, became aware of the manner of their death. He then forced
the lock of a door leading into a garden, and climbing over several
walls made his escape. Morgiana heard and saw all this, and, rejoicing
at her success, went to bed and fell asleep.

At daybreak Ali Baba arose, and, seeing the oil jars still there, asked
why the merchant had not gone with his mules. Morgiana bade him look
in the first jar and see if there was any oil. Seeing a man, he started
back in terror. "Have no fear," said Morgiana; "the man cannot harm
you: he is dead." Ali Baba, when he had recovered somewhat from his
astonishment, asked what had become of the merchant. "Merchant!" said
she, "he is no more a merchant than I am!" and she told him the whole
story, assuring him that it was a plot of the robbers of the forest, of
whom only three were left, and that the white and red chalk marks had
something to do with it. Ali Baba at once gave Morgiana her freedom,
saying that he owed her his life. They then buried the bodies in Ali
Baba's garden, while the mules were sold in the market by his slaves.

The Captain returned to his lonely cave, which seemed frightful to
him without his lost companions, and firmly resolved to avenge them by
killing Ali Baba. He dressed himself carefully, and went into the town,
where he took lodgings in an inn. In the course of a great many journeys
to the forest he carried away many rich stuffs and much fine linen, and
set up a shop opposite that of Ali Baba's son. He called himself Cogia
Hassan, and as he was both civil and well dressed he soon made friends
with Ali Baba's son, and through him with Ali Baba, whom he was
continually asking to sup with him. Ali Baba, wishing to return his
kindness, invited him into his house and received him smiling, thanking
him for his kindness to his son. When the merchant was about to take his
leave Ali Baba stopped him, saying: "Where are you going, sir, in such
haste? Will you not stay and sup with me?" The merchant refused, saying
that he had a reason; and, on Ali Baba's asking him what that was, he
replied: "It is, sir, that I can eat no victuals that have any salt
in them." "If that is all," said Ali Baba, "let me tell you that there
shall be no salt in either the meat or the bread that we eat to-night."
He went to give this order to Morgiana, who was much surprised. "Who is
this man," she said, "who eats no salt with his meat?" "He is an honest
man, Morgiana," returned her master; "therefore do as I bid you." But
she could not withstand a desire to see this strange man, so she helped
Abdallah to carry up the dishes, and saw in a moment that Cogia Hassan
was the robber Captain, and carried a dagger under his garment. "I am
not surprised," she said to herself, "that this wicked man, who intends
to kill my master, will eat no salt with him; but I will hinder his
plans."

She sent up the supper by Abdallah, while she made ready for one of the
boldest acts that could be thought on. When the dessert had been served,
Cogia Hassan was left alone with Ali Baba and his son, whom he thought
to make drunk and then to murder them. Morgiana, meanwhile, put on a
head-dress like a dancing-girl's, and clasped a girdle round her waist,
from which hung a dagger with a silver hilt, and said to Abdallah: "Take
your tabor, and let us go and divert our master and his guest." Abdallah
took his tabor and played before Morgiana until they came to the door,
where Abdallah stopped playing and Morgiana made a low courtesy. "Come
in, Morgiana," said Ali Baba, "and let Cogia Hassan see what you can
do"; and, turning to Cogia Hassan, he said: "She's my slave and my
housekeeper." Cogia Hassan was by no means pleased, for he feared
that his chance of killing Ali Baba was gone for the present; but he
pretended great eagerness to see Morgiana, and Abdallah began to play
and Morgiana to dance. After she had performed several dances she drew
her dagger and made passes with it, sometimes pointing it at her own
breast, sometimes at her master's, as if it were part of the dance.
Suddenly, out of breath, she snatched the tabor from Abdallah with her
left hand, and, holding the dagger in her right hand, held out the tabor
to her master. Ali Baba and his son put a piece of gold into it, and
Cogia Hassan, seeing that she was coming to him, pulled out his purse to
make her a present, but while he was putting his hand into it Morgiana
plunged the dagger into his heart.

"Unhappy girl!" cried Ali Baba and his son, "what have you done to ruin
us?"

"It was to preserve you, master, not to ruin you," answered Morgiana.
"See here," opening the false merchant's garment and showing the dagger;
"see what an enemy you have entertained! Remember, he would eat no salt
with you, and what more would you have? Look at him! he is both the
false oil merchant and the Captain of the Forty Thieves."

Ali Baba was so grateful to Morgiana for thus saving his life that he
offered her to his son in marriage, who readily consented, and a few
days after the wedding was celebrated with greatest splendor.

At the end of a year Ali Baba, hearing nothing of the two remaining
robbers, judged they were dead, and set out to the cave. The door opened
on his saying: "Open Sesame!" He went in, and saw that nobody had been
there since the Captain left it. He brought away as much gold as he
could carry, and returned to town. He told his son the secret of
the cave, which his son handed down in his turn, so the children and
grandchildren of Ali Baba were rich to the end of their lives.(1)


(1) Arabian Nights.




HANSEL AND GRETTEL


Once upon a time there dwelt on the outskirts of a large forest a poor
woodcutter with his wife and two children; the boy was called Hansel and
the girl Grettel. He had always little enough to live on, and once, when
there was a great famine in the land, he couldn't even provide them with
daily bread. One night, as he was tossing about in bed, full of cares
and worry, he sighed and said to his wife: "What's to become of us? how
are we to support our poor children, now that we have nothing more for
ourselves?" "I'll tell you what, husband," answered the woman; "early
to-morrow morning we'll take the children out into the thickest part
of the wood; there we shall light a fire for them and give them each a
piece of bread; then we'll go on to our work and leave them alone. They
won't be able to find their way home, and we shall thus be rid of them."
"No, wife," said her husband, "that I won't do; how could I find it in
my heart to leave my children alone in the wood? The wild beasts would
soon come and tear them to pieces." "Oh! you fool," said she, "then we
must all four die of hunger, and you may just as well go and plane the
boards for our coffins"; and she left him no peace till he consented.
"But I can't help feeling sorry for the poor children," added the
husband.

The children, too, had not been able to sleep for hunger, and had heard
what their step-mother had said to their father. Grettel wept bitterly
and spoke to Hansel: "Now it's all up with us." "No, no, Grettel," said
Hansel, "don't fret yourself; I'll be able to find a way to escape, no
fear." And when the old people had fallen asleep he got up, slipped
on his little coat, opened the back door and stole out. The moon was
shining clearly, and the white pebbles which lay in front of the house
glittered like bits of silver. Hansel bent down and filled his pocket
with as many of them as he could cram in. Then he went back and said to
Grettel: "Be comforted, my dear little sister, and go to sleep: God will
not desert us"; and he lay down in bed again.

At daybreak, even before the sun was up, the woman came and woke the two
children: "Get up, you lie-abeds, we're all going to the forest to fetch
wood." She gave them each a bit of bread and said: "There's something
for your luncheon, but don't you eat it up before, for it's all you'll
get." Grettel took the bread under her apron, as Hansel had the stones
in his pocket. Then they all set out together on the way to the forest.
After they had walked for a little, Hansel stood still and looked back
at the house, and this maneuver he repeated again and again. His father
observed him, and said: "Hansel, what are you gazing at there, and why
do you always remain behind? Take care, and don't lose your footing."
"Oh! father," said Hansel, "I am looking back at my white kitten, which
is sitting on the roof, waving me a farewell." The woman exclaimed:
"What a donkey you are! that isn't your kitten, that's the morning sun
shining on the chimney." But Hansel had not looked back at his kitten,
but had always dropped one of the white pebbles out of his pocket on to
the path.

When they had reached the middle of the forest the father said: "Now,
children, go and fetch a lot of wood, and I'll light a fire that you
may not feel cold." Hansel and Grettel heaped up brushwood till they had
made a pile nearly the size of a small hill. The brushwood was set fire
to, and when the flames leaped high the woman said: "Now lie down at the
fire, children, and rest yourselves: we are going into the forest to cut
down wood; when we've finished we'll come back and fetch you." Hansel
and Grettel sat down beside the fire, and at midday ate their little
bits of bread. They heard the strokes of the axe, so they thought their
father was quite near. But it was no axe they heard, but a bough he had
tied on a dead tree, and that was blown about by the wind. And when they
had sat for a long time their eyes closed with fatigue, and they fell
fast asleep. When they awoke at last it was pitch dark. Grettel began
to cry, and said: "How are we ever to get out of the wood?" But Hansel
comforted her. "Wait a bit," he said, "till the moon is up, and then
we'll find our way sure enough." And when the full moon had risen he
took his sister by the hand and followed the pebbles, which shone like
new threepenny bits, and showed them the path. They walked on through
the night, and at daybreak reached their father's house again. They
knocked at the door, and when the woman opened it she exclaimed: "You
naughty children, what a time you've slept in the wood! we thought
you were never going to come back." But the father rejoiced, for
his conscience had reproached him for leaving his children behind by
themselves.

Not long afterward there was again great dearth in the land, and the
children heard their mother address their father thus in bed one night:
"Everything is eaten up once more; we have only half a loaf in the
house, and when that's done it's all up with us. The children must be
got rid of; we'll lead them deeper into the wood this time, so that
they won't be able to find their way out again. There is no other way
of saving ourselves." The man's heart smote him heavily, and he thought:
"Surely it would be better to share the last bite with one's children!"
But his wife wouldn't listen to his arguments, and did nothing but scold
and reproach him. If a man yields once he's done for, and so, because he
had given in the first time, he was forced to do so the second.

But the children were awake, and had heard the conversation. When the
old people were asleep Hansel got up, and wanted to go out and pick up
pebbles again, as he had done the first time; but the woman had barred
the door, and Hansel couldn't get out. But he consoled his little
sister, and said: "Don't cry, Grettel, and sleep peacefully, for God is
sure to help us."

At early dawn the woman came and made the children get up. They received
their bit of bread, but it was even smaller than the time before. On the
way to the wood Hansel crumbled it in his pocket, and every few minutes
he stood still and dropped a crumb on the ground. "Hansel, what are you
stopping and looking about you for?" said the father. "I'm looking back
at my little pigeon, which is sitting on the roof waving me a farewell,"
answered Hansel. "Fool!" said the wife; "that isn't your pigeon, it's
the morning sun glittering on the chimney." But Hansel gradually threw
all his crumbs on the path. The woman led the children still deeper into
the forest farther than they had ever been in their lives before. Then
a big fire was lit again, and the mother said: "Just sit down there,
children, and if you're tired you can sleep a bit; we're going into the
forest to cut down wood, and in the evening when we're finished we'll
come back to fetch you." At midday Grettel divided her bread with
Hansel, for he had strewn his all along their path. Then they fell
asleep, and evening passed away, but nobody came to the poor children.
They didn't awake till it was pitch dark, and Hansel comforted his
sister, saying: "Only wait, Grettel, till the moon rises, then we shall
see the bread-crumbs I scattered along the path; they will show us the
way back to the house." When the moon appeared they got up, but they
found no crumbs, for the thousands of birds that fly about the woods
and fields had picked them all up. "Never mind," said Hansel to Grettel;
"you'll see we'll find a way out"; but all the same they did not. They
wandered about the whole night, and the next day, from morning till
evening, but they could not find a path out of the wood. They were very
hungry, too, for they had nothing to eat but a few berries they found
growing on the ground. And at last they were so tired that their legs
refused to carry them any longer, so they lay down under a tree and fell
fast asleep.

On the third morning after they had left their father's house they set
about their wandering again, but only got deeper and deeper into the
wood, and now they felt that if help did not come to them soon they must
perish. At midday they saw a beautiful little snow-white bird sitting on
a branch, which sang so sweetly that they stopped still and listened to
it. And when its song was finished it flapped its wings and flew on in
front of them. They followed it and came to a little house, on the roof
of which it perched; and when they came quite near they saw that the
cottage was made of bread and roofed with cakes, while the window was
made of transparent sugar. "Now we'll set to," said Hansel, "and have a
regular blow-out.(1) I'll eat a bit of the roof, and you, Grettel,
can eat some of the window, which you'll find a sweet morsel." Hansel
stretched up his hand and broke off a little bit of the roof to see what
it was like, and Grettel went to the casement and began to nibble at it.
Thereupon a shrill voice called out from the room inside:

  "Nibble, nibble, little mouse,
  Who's nibbling my house?"

The children answered:

  "Tis Heaven's own child,
  The tempest wild,"

and went on eating, without putting themselves about. Hansel, who
thoroughly appreciated the roof, tore down a big bit of it, while
Grettel pushed out a whole round window-pane, and sat down the better
to enjoy it. Suddenly the door opened, and an ancient dame leaning on
a staff hobbled out. Hansel and Grettel were so terrified that they let
what they had in their hands fall. But the old woman shook her head and
said: "Oh, ho! you dear children, who led you here? Just come in and
stay with me, no ill shall befall you." She took them both by the hand
and let them into the house, and laid a most sumptuous dinner before
them--milk and sugared pancakes, with apples and nuts. After they had
finished, two beautiful little white beds were prepared for them, and
when Hansel and Grettel lay down in them they felt as if they had got
into heaven.


(1) He was a vulgar boy!


The old woman had appeared to be most friendly, but she was really an
old witch who had waylaid the children, and had only built the little
bread house in order to lure them in. When anyone came into her power
she killed, cooked, and ate him, and held a regular feast-day for the
occasion. Now witches have red eyes, and cannot see far, but, like
beasts, they have a keen sense of smell, and know when human beings pass
by. When Hansel and Grettel fell into her hands she laughed maliciously,
and said jeeringly: "I've got them now; they sha'n't escape me." Early
in the morning, before the children were awake, she rose up, and when
she saw them both sleeping so peacefully, with their round rosy cheeks,
she muttered to herself: "That'll be a dainty bite." Then she seized
Hansel with her bony hand and carried him into a little stable, and
barred the door on him; he might scream as much as he liked, it did him
no good. Then she went to Grettel, shook her till she awoke, and
cried: "Get up, you lazy-bones, fetch water and cook something for your
brother. When he's fat I'll eat him up." Grettel began to cry bitterly,
but it was of no use; she had to do what the wicked witch bade her.

So the best food was cooked for poor Hansel, but Grettel got nothing but
crab-shells. Every morning the old woman hobbled out to the stable and
cried: "Hansel, put out your finger, that I may feel if you are getting
fat." But Hansel always stretched out a bone, and the old dame, whose
eyes were dim, couldn't see it, and thinking always it was Hansel's
finger, wondered why he fattened so slowly. When four weeks had passed
and Hansel still remained thin, she lost patience and determined to wait
no longer. "Hi, Grettel," she called to the girl, "be quick and get some
water. Hansel may be fat or thin, I'm going to kill him to-morrow and
cook him." Oh! how the poor little sister sobbed as she carried the
water, and how the tears rolled down her cheeks! "Kind heaven help us
now!" she cried; "if only the wild beasts in the wood had eaten us, then
at least we should have died together." "Just hold your peace," said the
old hag; "it won't help you."

Early in the morning Grettel had to go out and hang up the kettle full
of water, and light the fire. "First we'll bake," said the old dame;
"I've heated the oven already and kneaded the dough." She pushed Grettel
out to the oven, from which fiery flames were already issuing. "Creep
in," said the witch, "and see if it's properly heated, so that we can
shove in the bread." For when she had got Grettel in she meant to close
the oven and let the girl bake, that she might eat her up too. But
Grettel perceived her intention, and said: "I don't know how I'm to do
it; how do I get in?" "You silly goose!" said the hag, "the opening is
big enough; see, I could get in myself," and she crawled toward it, and
poked her head into the oven. Then Grettel gave her a shove that sent
her right in, shut the iron door, and drew the bolt. Gracious! how she
yelled, it was quite horrible; but Grettel fled, and the wretched old
woman was left to perish miserably.

Grettel flew straight to Hansel, opened the little stable-door, and
cried: "Hansel, we are free; the old witch is dead." Then Hansel sprang
like a bird out of a cage when the door is opened. How they rejoiced,
and fell on each other's necks, and jumped for joy, and kissed one
another! And as they had no longer any cause for fear, they went in the
old hag's house, and here they found, in every corner of the room, boxes
with pearls and precious stones. "These are even better than pebbles,"
said Hansel, and crammed his pockets full of them; and Grettel said:
"I too will bring something home," and she filled her apron full. "But
now," said Hansel, "let's go and get well away from the witch's wood."
When they had wandered about for some hours they came to a big lake.
"We can't get over," said Hansel; "I see no bridge of any sort or kind."
"Yes, and there's no ferry-boat either," answered Grettel; "but look,
there swims a white duck; if I ask her she'll help us over," and she
called out:

  "Here are two children, mournful very,
  Seeing neither bridge nor ferry;
  Take us upon your white back,
  And row us over, quack, quack!"


The duck swam toward them, and Hansel got on her back and bade his
little sister sit beside him. "No," answered Grettel, "we should be too
heavy a load for the duck: she shall carry us across separately." The
good bird did this, and when they were landed safely on the other side,
and had gone for a while, the wood became more and more familiar to
them, and at length they saw their father's house in the distance. Then
they set off to run, and bounding into the room fell on their father's
neck. The man had not passed a happy hour since he left them in the
wood, but the woman had died. Grettel shook out her apron so that the
pearls and precious stones rolled about the room, and Hansel threw down
one handful after the other out of his pocket. Thus all their troubles
were ended, and they lived happily ever afterward.

My story is done. See! there runs a little mouse; anyone who catches it
may make himself a large fur cap out of it.(1)


(1) Grimm.




SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED


A poor widow once lived in a little cottage with a garden in front of
it, in which grew two rose trees, one bearing white roses and the other
red. She had two children, who were just like the two rose trees; one
was called Snow-white and the other Rose-red, and they were the sweetest
and best children in the world, always diligent and always cheerful; but
Snow-white was quieter and more gentle than Rose-red. Rose-red loved
to run about the fields and meadows, and to pick flowers and catch
butterflies; but Snow-white sat at home with her mother and helped her
in the household, or read aloud to her when there was no work to do. The
two children loved each other so dearly that they always walked about
hand in hand whenever they went out together, and when Snow-white said,
"We will never desert each other," Rose-red answered: "No, not as long
as we live"; and the mother added: "Whatever one gets she shall share
with the other." They often roamed about in the woods gathering berries
and no beast offered to hurt them; on the contrary, they came up to them
in the most confiding manner; the little hare would eat a cabbage leaf
from their hands, the deer grazed beside them, the stag would bound past
them merrily, and the birds remained on the branches and sang to them
with all their might.

No evil ever befell them; if they tarried late in the wood and night
overtook them, they lay down together on the moss and slept till
morning, and their mother knew they were quite safe, and never felt
anxious about them. Once, when they had slept all night in the wood and
had been wakened by the morning sun, they perceived a beautiful child
in a shining white robe sitting close to their resting-place. The figure
got up, looked at them kindly, but said nothing, and vanished into the
wood. And when they looked round about them they became aware that they
had slept quite close to a precipice, over which they would certainly
have fallen had they gone on a few steps further in the darkness. And
when they told their mother of their adventure, she said what they had
seen must have been the angel that guards good children.

Snow-white and Rose-red kept their mother's cottage so beautifully clean
and neat that it was a pleasure to go into it. In summer Rose-red looked
after the house, and every morning before her mother awoke she placed
a bunch of flowers before the bed, from each tree a rose. In winter
Snow-white lit the fire and put on the kettle, which was made of brass,
but so beautifully polished that it shone like gold. In the evening when
the snowflakes fell their mother said: "Snow-white, go and close the
shutters," and they drew round the fire, while the mother put on her
spectacles and read aloud from a big book and the two girls listened and
sat and span. Beside them on the ground lay a little lamb, and behind
them perched a little white dove with its head tucked under its wings.

One evening as they sat thus cosily together someone knocked at the door
as though he desired admittance. The mother said: "Rose-red, open
the door quickly; it must be some traveler seeking shelter." Rose-red
hastened to unbar the door, and thought she saw a poor man standing in
the darkness outside; but it was no such thing, only a bear, who poked
his thick black head through the door. Rose-red screamed aloud and
sprang back in terror, the lamb began to bleat, the dove flapped its
wings, and Snow-white ran and hid behind her mother's bed. But the bear
began to speak, and said: "Don't be afraid: I won't hurt you. I am half
frozen, and only wish to warm myself a little." "My poor bear," said the
mother, "lie down by the fire, only take care you don't burn your fur."
Then she called out: "Snow-white and Rose-red, come out; the bear will
do you no harm; he is a good, honest creature." So they both came out of
their hiding-places, and gradually the lamb and dove drew near too, and
they all forgot their fear. The bear asked the children to beat the snow
a little out of his fur, and they fetched a brush and scrubbed him till
he was dry. Then the beast stretched himself in front of the fire, and
growled quite happily and comfortably. The children soon grew quite at
their ease with him, and led their helpless guest a fearful life. They
tugged his fur with their hands, put their small feet on his back, and
rolled him about here and there, or took a hazel wand and beat him
with it; and if he growled they only laughed. The bear submitted to
everything with the best possible good-nature, only when they went too
far he cried: "Oh! children, spare my life!

  "Snow-white and Rose-red,
  Don't beat your lover dead."

When it was time to retire for the night, and the others went to bed,
the mother said to the bear: "You can lie there on the hearth, in
heaven's name; it will be shelter for you from the cold and wet." As
soon as day dawned the children led him out, and he trotted over the
snow into the wood. From this time on the bear came every evening at
the same hour, and lay down by the hearth and let the children play what
pranks they liked with him; and they got so accustomed to him that the
door was never shut till their black friend had made his appearance.

When spring came, and all outside was green, the bear said one morning
to Snow-white: "Now I must go away, and not return again the whole
summer." "Where are you going to, dear bear?" asked Snow-white. "I
must go to the wood and protect my treasure from the wicked dwarfs.
In winter, when the earth is frozen hard, they are obliged to remain
underground, for they can't work their way through; but now, when the
sun has thawed and warmed the ground, they break through and come up
above to spy the land and steal what they can; what once falls into
their hands and into their caves is not easily brought back to light."
Snow-white was quite sad over their friend's departure, and when she
unbarred the door for him, the bear, stepping out, caught a piece of
his fur in the door-knocker, and Snow-white thought she caught sight of
glittering gold beneath it, but she couldn't be certain of it; and the
bear ran hastily away, and soon disappeared behind the trees.

A short time after this the mother sent the children into the wood to
collect fagots. They came in their wanderings upon a big tree which lay
felled on the ground, and on the trunk among the long grass they
noticed something jumping up and down, but what it was they couldn't
distinguish. When they approached nearer they perceived a dwarf with a
wizened face and a beard a yard long. The end of the beard was jammed
into a cleft of the tree, and the little man sprang about like a dog
on a chain, and didn't seem to know what he was to do. He glared at the
girls with his fiery red eyes, and screamed out: "What are you standing
there for? Can't you come and help me?" "What were you doing, little
man?" asked Rose-red. "You stupid, inquisitive goose!" replied the
dwarf; "I wanted to split the tree, in order to get little chips of
wood for our kitchen fire; those thick logs that serve to make fires for
coarse, greedy people like yourselves quite burn up all the little food
we need. I had successfully driven in the wedge, and all was going well,
but the cursed wood was so slippery that it suddenly sprang out, and the
tree closed up so rapidly that I had no time to take my beautiful white
beard out, so here I am stuck fast, and I can't get away; and you silly,
smooth-faced, milk-and-water girls just stand and laugh! Ugh! what
wretches you are!"

The children did all in their power, but they couldn't get the beard
out; it was wedged in far too firmly. "I will run and fetch somebody,"
said Rose-red. "Crazy blockheads!" snapped the dwarf; "what's the good
of calling anyone else? You're already two too many for me. Does
nothing better occur to you than that?" "Don't be so impatient," said
Snow-white, "I'll see you get help," and taking her scissors out of
her pocket she cut off the end of his beard. As soon as the dwarf felt
himself free he seized a bag full of gold which was hidden among the
roots of the tree, lifted it up, and muttered aloud: "Curse these rude
wretches, cutting off a piece of my splendid beard!" With these words he
swung the bag over his back, and disappeared without as much as looking
at the children again.

Shortly after this Snow-white and Rose-red went out to get a dish of
fish. As they approached the stream they saw something which looked like
an enormous grasshopper springing toward the water as if it were going
to jump in. They ran forward and recognized their old friend the dwarf.
"Where are you going to?" asked Rose-red; "you're surely not going to
jump into the water?" "I'm not such a fool," screamed the dwarf. "Don't
you see that cursed fish is trying to drag me in?" The little man
had been sitting on the bank fishing, when unfortunately the wind had
entangled his beard in the line; and when immediately afterward a big
fish bit, the feeble little creature had no strength to pull it out; the
fish had the upper fin, and dragged the dwarf toward him. He clung on
with all his might to every rush and blade of grass, but it didn't help
him much; he had to follow every movement of the fish, and was in great
danger of being drawn into the water. The girls came up just at the
right moment, held him firm, and did all they could to disentangle his
beard from the line; but in vain, beard and line were in a hopeless
muddle. Nothing remained but to produce the scissors and cut the beard,
by which a small part of it was sacrificed.

When the dwarf perceived what they were about he yelled to them: "Do
you call that manners, you toad-stools! to disfigure a fellow's face? It
wasn't enough that you shortened my beard before, but you must now
needs cut off the best bit of it. I can't appear like this before my own
people. I wish you'd been in Jericho first." Then he fetched a sack of
pearls that lay among the rushes, and without saying another word he
dragged it away and disappeared behind a stone.

It happened that soon after this the mother sent the two girls to the
town to buy needles, thread, laces, and ribbons. Their road led over a
heath where huge boulders of rock lay scattered here and there. While
trudging along they saw a big bird hovering in the air, circling slowly
above them, but always descending lower, till at last it settled on
a rock not far from them. Immediately afterward they heard a sharp,
piercing cry. They ran forward, and saw with horror that the eagle had
pounced on their old friend the dwarf, and was about to carry him off.
The tender-hearted children seized hold of the little man, and struggled
so long with the bird that at last he let go his prey. When the dwarf
had recovered from the first shock he screamed in his screeching voice:
"Couldn't you have treated me more carefully? You have torn my thin
little coat all to shreds, useless, awkward hussies that you are!" Then
he took a bag of precious stones and vanished under the rocks into his
cave. The girls were accustomed to his ingratitude, and went on their
way and did their business in town. On their way home, as they were
again passing the heath, they surprised the dwarf pouring out his
precious stones on an open space, for he had thought no one would pass
by at so late an hour. The evening sun shone on the glittering stones,
and they glanced and gleamed so beautifully that the children stood
still and gazed on them. "What are you standing there gaping for?"
screamed the dwarf, and his ashen-gray face became scarlet with rage.
He was about to go off with these angry words when a sudden growl was
heard, and a black bear trotted out of the wood. The dwarf jumped up in
great fright, but he hadn't time to reach his place of retreat, for the
bear was already close to him. Then he cried in terror: "Dear Mr.
Bear, spare me! I'll give you all my treasure. Look at those beautiful
precious stones lying there. Spare my life! what pleasure would you get
from a poor feeble little fellow like me? You won't feel me between your
teeth. There, lay hold of these two wicked girls, they will be a tender
morsel for you, as fat as young quails; eat them up, for heaven's sake."
But the bear, paying no attention to his words, gave the evil little
creature one blow with his paw, and he never moved again.

The girls had run away, but the bear called after them: "Snow-white
and Rose-red, don't be afraid; wait, and I'll come with you." Then they
recognized his voice and stood still, and when the bear was quite close
to them his skin suddenly fell off, and a beautiful man stood beside
them, all dressed in gold. "I am a king's son," he said, "and have been
doomed by that unholy little dwarf, who had stolen my treasure, to roam
about the woods as a wild bear till his death should set me free. Now he
has got his well-merited punishment."

Snow-white married him, and Rose-red his brother, and they divided the
great treasure the dwarf had collected in his cave between them. The
old mother lived for many years peacefully with her children; and she
carried the two rose trees with her, and they stood in front of her
window, and every year they bore the finest red and white roses.(1)


(1) Grimm.




THE GOOSE-GIRL


Once upon a time an old queen, whose husband had been dead for many
years, had a beautiful daughter. When she grew up she was betrothed to
a prince who lived a great way off. Now, when the time drew near for her
to be married and to depart into a foreign kingdom, her old mother gave
her much costly baggage, and many ornaments, gold and silver, trinkets
and knicknacks, and, in fact, everything that belonged to a royal
trousseau, for she loved her daughter very dearly. She gave her a
waiting-maid also, who was to ride with her and hand her over to the
bridegroom, and she provided each of them with a horse for the journey.
Now the Princess's horse was called Falada, and could speak.

When the hour for departure drew near the old mother went to her
bedroom, and taking a small knife she cut her fingers till they bled;
then she held a white rag under them, and letting three drops of blood
fall into it, she gave it to her daughter, and said: "Dear child, take
great care of this rag: it may be of use to you on the journey."

So they took a sad farewell of each other, and the Princess stuck the
rag in front of her dress, mounted her horse, and set forth on the
journey to her bridegroom's kingdom. After they had ridden for about
an hour the Princess began to feel very thirsty, and said to her
waiting-maid: "Pray get down and fetch me some water in my golden cup
out of yonder stream: I would like a drink." "If you're thirsty," said
the maid, "dismount yourself, and lie down by the water and drink; I
don't mean to be your servant any longer." The Princess was so thirsty
that she got down, bent over the stream, and drank, for she wasn't
allowed to drink out of the golden goblet. As she drank she murmured:
"Oh! heaven, what am I to do?" and the three drops of blood replied:

  "If your mother only knew,
  Her heart would surely break in two."

But the Princess was meek, and said nothing about her maid's rude
behavior, and quietly mounted her horse again. They rode on their
way for several miles, but the day was hot, and the sun's rays smote
fiercely on them, so that the Princess was soon overcome by thirst
again. And as they passed a brook she called once more to her
waiting-maid: "Pray get down and give me a drink from my golden
cup," for she had long ago forgotten her maid's rude words. But the
waiting-maid replied, more haughtily even than before: "If you want a
drink, you can dismount and get it; I don't mean to be your servant."
Then the Princess was compelled by her thirst to get down, and bending
over the flowing water she cried and said: "Oh! heaven, what am I to
do?" and the three drops of blood replied:

  "If your mother only knew,
  Her heart would surely break in two."

And as she drank thus, and leaned right over the water, the rag
containing the three drops of blood fell from her bosom and floated down
the stream, and she in her anxiety never even noticed her loss. But the
waiting-maid had observed it with delight, as she knew it gave her power
over the bride, for in losing the drops of blood the Princess had become
weak and powerless. When she wished to get on her horse Falada again,
the waiting-maid called out: "I mean to ride Falada: you must mount
my beast"; and this too she had to submit to. Then the waiting-maid
commanded her harshly to take off her royal robes, and to put on her
common ones, and finally she made her swear by heaven not to say a word
about the matter when they reached the palace; and if she hadn't taken
this oath she would have been killed on the spot. But Falada observed
everything, and laid it all to heart.

The waiting-maid now mounted Falada, and the real bride the worse horse,
and so they continued their journey till at length they arrived at the
palace yard. There was great rejoicing over the arrival, and the Prince
sprang forward to meet them, and taking the waiting-maid for his bride,
he lifted her down from her horse and led her upstairs to the royal
chamber. In the meantime the real Princess was left standing below in
the courtyard. The old King, who was looking out of his window, beheld
her in this plight, and it struck him how sweet and gentle, even
beautiful, she looked. He went at once to the royal chamber, and asked
the bride who it was she had brought with her and had left thus standing
in the court below. "Oh!" replied the bride, "I brought her with me to
keep me company on the journey; give the girl something to do, that she
may not be idle." But the old King had no work for her, and couldn't
think of anything; so he said, "I've a small boy who looks after the
geese, she'd better help him." The youth's name was Curdken, and the
real bride was made to assist him in herding geese.

Soon after this the false bride said to the Prince: "Dearest husband,
I pray you grant me a favor." He answered: "That I will." "Then let the
slaughterer cut off the head of the horse I rode here upon, because it
behaved very badly on the journey." But the truth was she was afraid
lest the horse should speak and tell how she had treated the Princess.
She carried her point, and the faithful Falada was doomed to die.
When the news came to the ears of the real Princess she went to the
slaughterer, and secretly promised him a piece of gold if he would do
something for her. There was in the town a large dark gate, through
which she had to pass night and morning with the geese; would he "kindly
hang up Falada's head there, that she might see it once again?" The
slaughterer said he would do as she desired, chopped off the head, and
nailed it firmly over the gateway.

Early next morning, as she and Curdken were driving their flock through
the gate, she said as she passed under:


  "Oh! Falada, 'tis you hang there";

and the head replied:

  "'Tis you; pass under, Princess fair:
  If your mother only knew,
  Her heart would surely break in two."

Then she left the tower and drove the geese into a field. And when they
had reached the common where the geese fed she sat down and unloosed
her hair, which was of pure gold. Curdken loved to see it glitter in the
sun, and wanted much to pull some hair out. Then she spoke:

  "Wind, wind, gently sway,
  Blow Curdken's hat away;
  Let him chase o'er field and wold
  Till my locks of ruddy gold,
  Now astray and hanging down,
  Be combed and plaited in a crown."


Then a gust of wind blew Curdken's hat away, and he had to chase it over
hill and dale. When he returned from the pursuit she had finished
her combing and curling, and his chance of getting any hair was gone.
Curdken was very angry, and wouldn't speak to her. So they herded the
geese till evening and then went home.

The next morning, as they passed under the gate, the girl said:

  "Oh! Falada, 'tis you hang there;"

and the head replied:

  "'Tis you; pass under, Princess fair:
  If your mother only knew,
  Her heart would surely break in two."

Then she went on her way till she came to the common, where she sat down
and began to comb out her hair; then Curdken ran up to her and wanted to
grasp some of the hair from her head, but she called out hastily:

  "Wind, wind, gently sway,
  Blow Curdken's hat away;
  Let him chase o'er field and wold
  Till my locks of ruddy gold,
  Now astray and hanging down,
  Be combed and plaited in a crown."


Then a puff of wind came and blew Curdken's hat far away, so that he had
to run after it; and when he returned she had long finished putting
up her golden locks, and he couldn't get any hair; so they watched the
geese till it was dark.

But that evening when they got home Curdken went to the old King, and
said: "I refuse to herd geese any longer with that girl." "For what
reason?" asked the old King. "Because she does nothing but annoy me
all day long," replied Curdken; and he proceeded to relate all her
iniquities, and said: "Every morning as we drive the flock through the
dark gate she says to a horse's head that hangs on the wall:

     "'Oh! Falada, 'tis you hang there';

and the head replies:

     "''Tis you; pass under, Princess fair:
     If your mother only knew,
     Her heart would surely break in two.'"


And Curdken went on to tell what passed on the common where the geese
fed, and how he had always to chase his hat.

The old King bade him go and drive forth his flock as usual next day;
and when morning came he himself took up his position behind the dark
gate, and heard how the goose-girl greeted Falada. Then he followed her
through the field, and hid himself behind a bush on the common. He soon
saw with his own eyes how the goose-boy and the goose-girl looked after
the geese, and how after a time the maiden sat down and loosed her hair,
that glittered like gold, and repeated:

  "Wind, wind, gently sway,
  Blow Curdken's hat away;
  Let him chase o'er field and wold
  Till my locks of ruddy gold
  Now astray and hanging down,
  Be combed and plaited in a crown."

Then a gust of wind came and blew Curdken's hat away, so that he had to
fly over hill and dale after it, and the girl in the meantime quietly
combed and plaited her hair: all this the old King observed, and
returned to the palace without anyone having noticed him. In the evening
when the goose-girl came home he called her aside, and asked her why she
behaved as she did. "I may not tell you why; how dare I confide my woes
to anyone? for I swore not to by heaven, otherwise I should have lost my
life." The old King begged her to tell him all, and left her no peace,
but he could get nothing out of her. At last he said: "Well, if you
won't tell me, confide your trouble to the iron stove there," and he
went away. Then she crept to the stove, and began to sob and cry and to
pour out her poor little heart, and said: "Here I sit, deserted by all
the world, I who am a king's daughter, and a false waiting-maid has
forced me to take off my own clothes, and has taken my place with my
bridegroom, while I have to fulfill the lowly office of goose-girl.

  "If my mother only knew
  Her heart would surely break in two."


But the old King stood outside at the stove chimney, and listened to her
words. Then he entered the room again, and bidding her leave the stove,
he ordered royal apparel to be put on her, in which she looked amazingly
lovely. Then he summoned his son, and revealed to him that he had got
the false bride, who was nothing but a waiting-maid, while the real one,
in the guise of the ex-goose-girl, was standing at his side. The young
King rejoiced from his heart when he saw her beauty and learned how good
she was, and a great banquet was prepared, to which everyone was bidden.
The bridegroom sat at the head of the table, the Princess on one side of
him and the waiting-maid on the other; but she was so dazzled that she
did not recognize the Princess in her glittering garments. Now when they
had eaten and drunk, and were merry, the old King asked the waiting-maid
to solve a knotty point for him. "What," said he, "should be done to a
certain person who has deceived everyone?" and he proceeded to relate
the whole story, ending up with, "Now what sentence should be passed?"
Then the false bride answered: "She deserves to be put stark naked into
a barrel lined with sharp nails, which should be dragged by two white
horses up and down the street till she is dead."

"You are the person," said the King, "and you have passed sentence on
yourself; and even so it shall be done to you." And when the sentence
had been carried out the young King was married to his real bride, and
both reigned over the kingdom in peace and happiness.(1)


(1) Grimm.




TOADS AND DIAMONDS


THERE was once upon a time a widow who had two daughters. The eldest
was so much like her in the face and humor that whoever looked upon the
daughter saw the mother. They were both so disagreeable and so proud
that there was no living with them.

The youngest, who was the very picture of her father for courtesy and
sweetness of temper, was withal one of the most beautiful girls ever
seen. As people naturally love their own likeness, this mother even
doted on her eldest daughter and at the same time had a horrible
aversion for the youngest--she made her eat in the kitchen and work
continually.

Among other things, this poor child was forced twice a day to draw water
above a mile and a-half off the house, and bring home a pitcher full
of it. One day, as she was at this fountain, there came to her a poor
woman, who begged of her to let her drink.

"Oh! ay, with all my heart, Goody," said this pretty little girl;
and rinsing immediately the pitcher, she took up some water from the
clearest place of the fountain, and gave it to her, holding up the
pitcher all the while, that she might drink the easier.

The good woman, having drunk, said to her:

"You are so very pretty, my dear, so good and so mannerly, that I cannot
help giving you a gift." For this was a fairy, who had taken the form
of a poor country woman, to see how far the civility and good manners of
this pretty girl would go. "I will give you for a gift," continued the
Fairy, "that, at every word you speak, there shall come out of your
mouth either a flower or a jewel."

When this pretty girl came home her mother scolded her for staying so
long at the fountain.

"I beg your pardon, mamma," said the poor girl, "for not making more
haste."

And in speaking these words there came out of her mouth two roses, two
pearls, and two diamonds.

"What is it I see there?" said the mother, quite astonished. "I think I
see pearls and diamonds come out of the girl's mouth! How happens this,
child?"

This was the first time she had ever called her child.

The poor creature told her frankly all the matter, not without dropping
out infinite numbers of diamonds.

"In good faith," cried the mother, "I must send my child thither.
Come hither, Fanny; look what comes out of thy sister's mouth when she
speaks. Wouldst not thou be glad, my dear, to have the same gift given
thee? Thou hast nothing else to do but go and draw water out of the
fountain, and when a certain poor woman asks you to let her drink, to
give it to her very civilly."

"It would be a very fine sight indeed," said this ill-bred minx, "to see
me go draw water."

"You shall go, hussy!" said the mother; "and this minute."

So away she went, but grumbling all the way, taking with her the best
silver tankard in the house.

She was no sooner at the fountain than she saw coming out of the wood
a lady most gloriously dressed, who came up to her, and asked to drink.
This was, you must know, the very fairy who appeared to her sister,
but now had taken the air and dress of a princess, to see how far this
girl's rudeness would go.

"Am I come hither," said the proud, saucy one, "to serve you with water,
pray? I suppose the silver tankard was brought purely for your ladyship,
was it? However, you may drink out of it, if you have a fancy."

"You are not over and above mannerly," answered the Fairy, without
putting herself in a passion. "Well, then, since you have so little
breeding, and are so disobliging, I give you for a gift that at every
word you speak there shall come out of your mouth a snake or a toad."

So soon as her mother saw her coming she cried out:

"Well, daughter?"

"Well, mother?" answered the pert hussy, throwing out of her mouth two
vipers and two toads.

"Oh! mercy," cried the mother; "what is it I see? Oh! it is that wretch
her sister who has occasioned all this; but she shall pay for it"; and
immediately she ran to beat her. The poor child fled away from her, and
went to hide herself in the forest, not far from thence.

The King's son, then on his return from hunting, met her, and seeing her
so very pretty, asked her what she did there alone and why she cried.

"Alas! sir, my mamma has turned me out of doors."

The King's son, who saw five or six pearls and as many diamonds come out
of her mouth, desired her to tell him how that happened. She thereupon
told him the whole story; and so the King's son fell in love with
her, and, considering himself that such a gift was worth more than any
marriage portion, conducted her to the palace of the King his father,
and there married her.

As for the sister, she made herself so much hated that her own mother
turned her off; and the miserable wretch, having wandered about a good
while without finding anybody to take her in, went to a corner of the
wood, and there died.(1)


(1) Charles Perrault.




PRINCE DARLING


ONCE upon a time there lived a king who was so just and kind that his
subjects called him "the Good King." It happened one day, when he was
out hunting, that a little white rabbit, which his dogs were chasing,
sprang into his arms for shelter. The King stroked it gently, and said
to it:

"Well, bunny, as you have come to me for protection I will see that
nobody hurts you."

And he took it home to his palace and had it put in a pretty little
house, with all sorts of nice things to eat.

That night, when he was alone in his room, a beautiful lady suddenly
appeared before him; her long dress was as white as snow, and she had
a crown of white roses upon her head. The good King was very much
surprised to see her, for he knew his door had been tightly shut, and he
could not think how she had got in. But she said to him:

"I am the Fairy Truth. I was passing through the wood when you were out
hunting, and I wished to find out if you were really good, as everybody
said you were, so I took the shape of a little rabbit and came to your
arms for shelter, for I know that those who are merciful to animals will
be still kinder to their fellow-men. If you had refused to help me
I should have been certain that you were wicked. I thank you for the
kindness you have shown me, which has made me your friend for ever. You
have only to ask me for anything you want and I promise that I will give
it to you."

"Madam," said the good King, "since you are a fairy you no doubt know
all my wishes. I have but one son whom I love very dearly, that is why
he is called Prince Darling. If you are really good enough to wish to do
me a favor, I beg that you will become his friend."

"With all my heart," answered the Fairy. "I can make your son the
handsomest prince in the world, or the richest, or the most powerful;
choose whichever you like for him."

"I do not ask either of these things for my son," replied the good
King; "but if you will make him the best of princes, I shall indeed be
grateful to you. What good would it do him to be rich, or handsome, or
to possess all the kingdoms of the world if he were wicked? You
know well he would still be unhappy. Only a good man can be really
contented."

"You are quite right," answered the Fairy; "but it is not in my power to
make Prince Darling a good man unless he will help me; he must himself
try hard to become good, I can only promise to give him good advice, to
scold him for his faults, and to punish him if he will not correct and
punish himself."

The good King was quite satisfied with this promise; and very soon
afterward he died.

Prince Darling was very sorry, for he loved his father with all his
heart, and he would willingly have given all his kingdoms and all his
treasures of gold and silver if they could have kept the good King with
him.

Two days afterward, when the Prince had gone to bed, the Fairy suddenly
appeared to him and said:

"I promised your father that I would be your friend, and to keep my word
I have come to bring you a present." At the same time she put a little
gold ring upon his finger.

"Take great care of this ring," she said: "it is more precious than
diamonds; every time you do a bad deed it will prick your finger, but
if, in spite of its pricking, you go on in your own evil way, you will
lose my friendship, and I shall become your enemy."

So saying, the Fairy disappeared, leaving Prince Darling very much
astonished.

For some time he behaved so well that the ring never pricked him, and
that made him so contented that his subjects called him Prince Darling
the Happy.

One day, however, he went out hunting, but could get no sport, which
put him in a very bad temper; it seemed to him as he rode along that his
ring was pressing into his finger, but as it did not prick him he did
not heed it. When he got home and went to his own room, his little dog
Bibi ran to meet him, jumping round him with pleasure. "Get away!" said
the Prince, quite gruffly. "I don't want you, you are in the way."

The poor little dog, who didn't understand this at all, pulled at his
coat to make him at least look at her, and this made Prince Darling so
cross that he gave her quite a hard kick.

Instantly his ring pricked him sharply, as if it had been a pin. He was
very much surprised, and sat down in a corner of his room feeling quite
ashamed of himself.

"I believe the Fairy is laughing at me," he thought. "Surely I can have
done no great wrong in just kicking a tiresome animal! What is the good
of my being ruler of a great kingdom if I am not even allowed to beat my
own dog?"

"I am not making fun of you," said a voice, answering Prince Darling's
thoughts. "You have committed three faults. First of all, you were out
of temper because you could not have what you wanted, and you thought
all men and animals were only made to do your pleasure; then you were
really angry, which is very naughty indeed; and lastly, you were
cruel to a poor little animal who did not in the least deserve to be
ill-treated.

"I know you are far above a little dog, but if it were right and
allowable that great people should ill-treat all who are beneath them, I
might at this moment beat you, or kill you, for a fairy is greater than
a man. The advantage of possessing a great empire is not to be able to
do the evil that one desires, but to do all the good that one possibly
can."

The Prince saw how naughty he had been, and promised to try and do
better in future, but he did not keep his word. The fact was he had been
brought up by a foolish nurse, who had spoiled him when he was little.
If he wanted anything he only had to cry and fret and stamp his feet
and she would give him whatever he asked for, which had made him
self-willed; also she had told him from morning to night that he would
one day be a king, and that kings were very happy, because everyone was
bound to obey and respect them, and no one could prevent them from doing
just as they liked.

When the Prince grew old enough to understand, he soon learned that
there could be nothing worse than to be proud, obstinate, and conceited,
and he had really tried to cure himself of these defects, but by that
time all his faults had become habits; and a bad habit is very hard to
get rid of. Not that he was naturally of a bad disposition; he was truly
sorry when he had been naughty, and said:

"I am very unhappy to have to struggle against my anger and pride every
day; if I had been punished for them when I was little they would not be
such a trouble to me now."

His ring pricked him very often, and sometimes he left off what he was
doing at once; but at other times he would not attend to it. Strangely
enough, it gave him only a slight prick for a trifling fault, but when
he was really naughty it made his finger actually bleed. At last he got
tired of being constantly reminded, and wanted to be able to do as he
liked, so he threw his ring aside, and thought himself the happiest of
men to have got rid of its teasing pricks. He gave himself up to doing
every foolish thing that occurred to him, until he became quite wicked
and nobody could like him any longer.

One day, when the Prince was walking about, he saw a young girl who was
so very pretty that he made up his mind at once that he would marry her.
Her name was Celia, and she was as good as she was beautiful.

Prince Darling fancied that Celia would think herself only too happy if
he offered to make her a great queen, but she said fearlessly:

"Sire, I am only a shepherdess, and a poor girl, but, nevertheless, I
will not marry you."

"Do you dislike me?" asked the Prince, who was very much vexed at this
answer.

"No, my Prince," replied Celia; "I cannot help thinking you very
handsome; but what good would riches be to me, and all the grand dresses
and splendid carriages that you would give me, if the bad deeds which I
should see you do every day made me hate and despise you?"

The Prince was very angry at this speech, and commanded his officers to
make Celia a prisoner and carry her off to his palace. All day long the
remembrance of what she had said annoyed him, but as he loved her he
could not make up his mind to have her punished.

One of the Prince's favorite companions was his foster-brother, whom
he trusted entirely; but he was not at all a good man, and gave Prince
Darling very bad advice, and encouraged him in all his evil ways. When
he saw the Prince so downcast he asked what was the matter, and when
he explained that he could not bear Celia's bad opinion of him, and was
resolved to be a better man in order to please her, this evil adviser
said to him:

"You are very kind to trouble yourself about this little girl; if I were
you I would soon make her obey me. Remember that you are a king, and
that it would be laughable to see you trying to please a shepherdess,
who ought to be only too glad to be one of your slaves. Keep her in
prison, and feed her on bread and water for a little while, and then, if
she still says she will not marry you, have her head cut off, to teach
other people that you mean to be obeyed. Why, if you cannot make a girl
like that do as you wish, your subjects will soon forget that they are
only put into this world for our pleasure."

"But," said Prince Darling, "would it not be a shame if I had an
innocent girl put to death? For Celia has done nothing to deserve
punishment."

"If people will not do as you tell them they ought to suffer for it,"
answered his foster-brother; "but even if it were unjust, you had better
be accused of that by your subjects than that they should find out that
they may insult and thwart you as often as they please."

In saying this he was touching a weak point in his brother's character;
for the Prince's fear of losing any of his power made him at once
abandon his first idea of trying to be good, and resolve to try and
frighten the shepherdess into consenting to marry him.

His foster-brother, who wanted him to keep this resolution, invited
three young courtiers, as wicked as himself to sup with the Prince,
and they persuaded him to drink a great deal of wine, and continued to
excite his anger against Celia by telling him that she had laughed at
his love for her; until at last, in quite a furious rage, he rushed off
to find her, declaring that if she still refused to marry him she should
be sold as a slave the very next day.

But when he reached the room in which Celia had been locked up, he was
greatly surprised to find that she was not in it, though he had the key
in his own pocket all the time. His anger was terrible, and he vowed
vengeance against whoever had helped her to escape. His bad friends,
when they heard him, resolved to turn his wrath upon an old nobleman who
had formerly been his tutor; and who still dared sometimes to tell the
Prince of his faults, for he loved him as if he had been his own son. At
first Prince Darling had thanked him, but after a time he grew impatient
and thought it must be just mere love of fault-finding that made his old
tutor blame him when everyone else was praising and flattering him. So
he ordered him to retire from his Court, though he still, from time
to time, spoke of him as a worthy man whom he respected, even if he no
longer loved him. His unworthy friends feared that he might some day
take it into his head to recall his old tutor, so they thought they now
had a good opportunity of getting him banished for ever.

They reported to the Prince that Suliman, for that was the tutor's name,
had boasted of having helped Celia to escape, and they bribed three men
to say that Suliman himself had told them about it. The Prince, in great
anger, sent his foster-brother with a number of soldiers to bring his
tutor before him, in chains, like a criminal. After giving this order he
went to his own room, but he had scarcely got into it when there was
a clap of thunder which made the ground shake, and the Fairy Truth
appeared suddenly before him.

"I promised your father," said she sternly, "to give you good advice,
and to punish you if you refused to follow it. You have despised my
counsel, and have gone your own evil way until you are only outwardly a
man; really you are a monster--the horror of everyone who knows you. It
is time that I should fulfil my promise, and begin your punishment. I
condemn you to resemble the animals whose ways you have imitated. You
have made yourself like the lion by your anger, and like the wolf by
your greediness. Like a snake, you have ungratefully turned upon one who
was a second father to you; your churlishness has made you like a bull.
Therefore, in your new form, take the appearance of all these animals."

The Fairy had scarcely finished speaking when Prince Darling saw to his
horror that her words were fulfilled. He had a lion's head, a bull's
horns, a wolf's feet, and a snake's body. At the same instant he found
himself in a great forest, beside a clear lake, in which he could see
plainly the horrible creature he had become, and a voice said to him:

"Look carefully at the state to which your wickedness has brought you;
believe me, your soul is a thousand times more hideous than your body."

Prince Darling recognized the voice of the Fairy Truth and turned in
a fury to catch her and eat her up if he possibly could; but he saw no
one, and the same voice went on:

"I laugh at your powerlessness and anger, and I intend to punish your
pride by letting you fall into the hands of your own subjects."

The Prince began to think that the best thing he could do would be to
get as far away from the lake as he could, then at least he would not
be continually reminded of his terrible ugliness. So he ran toward the
wood, but before he had gone many yards he fell into a deep pit which
had been made to trap bears, and the hunters, who were hiding in a tree,
leaped down, and secured him with several chains, and led him into the
chief city of his own kingdom.

On the way, instead of recognizing that his own faults had brought this
punishment upon him, he accused the Fairy of being the cause of all his
misfortunes, and bit and tore at his chains furiously.

As they approached the town he saw that some great rejoicing was being
held, and when the hunters asked what had happened they were told that
the Prince, whose only pleasure it was to torment his people, had been
found in his room, killed by a thunder-bolt (for that was what was
supposed to have become of him). Four of his courtiers, those who had
encouraged him in his wicked doings, had tried to seize the kingdom
and divide it between them, but the people, who knew it was their bad
counsels which had so changed the Prince, had cut off their heads, and
had offered the crown to Suliman, whom the Prince had left in prison.
This noble lord had just been crowned, and the deliverance of the
kingdom was the cause of the rejoicing "For," they said, "he is a good
and just man, and we shall once more enjoy peace and prosperity."

Prince Darling roared with anger when he heard this; but it was still
worse for him when he reached the great square before his own palace. He
saw Suliman seated upon a magnificent throne, and all the people crowded
round, wishing him a long life that he might undo all the mischief done
by his predecessor.

Presently Suliman made a sign with his hand that the people should be
silent, and said: "I have accepted the crown you have offered me, but
only that I may keep it for Prince Darling, who is not dead as you
suppose; the Fairy has assured me that there is still hope that you may
some day see him again, good and virtuous as he was when he first came
to the throne. Alas!" he continued, "he was led away by flatterers.
I knew his heart, and am certain that if it had not been for the bad
influence of those who surrounded him he would have been a good king and
a father to his people. We may hate his faults, but let us pity him and
hope for his restoration. As for me, I would die gladly if that could
bring back our Prince to reign justly and worthily once more."

These words went to Prince Darling's heart; he realized the true
affection and faithfulness of his old tutor, and for the first time
reproached himself for all his evil deeds; at the same instant he felt
all his anger melting away, and he began quickly to think over his
past life, and to admit that his punishment was not more than he had
deserved. He left off tearing at the iron bars of the cage in which he
was shut up, and became as gentle as a lamb.

The hunters who had caught him took him to a great menagerie, where he
was chained up among all the other wild beasts, and he determined to
show his sorrow for his past bad behavior by being gentle and obedient
to the man who had to take care of him. Unfortunately, this man was very
rough and unkind, and though the poor monster was quite quiet, he often
beat him without rhyme or reason when he happened to be in a bad temper.
One day when this keeper was asleep a tiger broke its chain, and flew at
him to eat him up. Prince Darling, who saw what was going on, at
first felt quite pleased to think that he should be delivered from his
persecutor, but soon thought better of it and wished that he were free.

"I would return good for evil," he said to himself, "and save the
unhappy man's life." He had hardly wished this when his iron cage flew
open, and he rushed to the side of the keeper, who was awake and was
defending himself against the tiger. When he saw the monster had got out
he gave himself up for lost, but his fear was soon changed into joy, for
the kind monster threw itself upon the tiger and very soon killed it,
and then came and crouched at the feet of the man it had saved.

Overcome with gratitude, the keeper stooped to caress the strange
creature which had done him such a great service; but suddenly a voice
said in his ear:

"A good action should never go unrewarded," and at the same instant the
monster disappeared, and he saw at his feet only a pretty little dog!

Prince Darling, delighted by the change, frisked about the keeper,
showing his joy in every way he could, and the man, taking him up in his
arms, carried him to the King, to whom he told the whole story.

The Queen said she would like to have this wonderful little dog, and
the Prince would have been very happy in his new home if he could have
forgotten that he was a man and a king. The Queen petted and took
care of him, but she was so afraid that he would get too fat that she
consulted the court physician, who said that he was to be fed only upon
bread, and was not to have much even of that. So poor Prince Darling was
terribly hungry all day long, but he was very patient about it.

One day, when they gave him his little loaf for breakfast, he thought
he would like to eat it out in the garden; so he took it up in his mouth
and trotted away toward a brook that he knew of a long way from the
palace. But he was surprised to find that the brook was gone, and where
it had been stood a great house that seemed to be built of gold and
precious stones. Numbers of people splendidly dressed were going into
it, and sounds of music and dancing and feasting could be heard from the
windows.

But what seemed very strange was that those people who came out of the
house were pale and thin, and their clothes were torn, and hanging in
rags about them. Some fell down dead as they came out before they had
time to get away; others crawled farther with great difficulty; while
others again lay on the ground, fainting with hunger, and begged a
morsel of bread from those who were going into the house, but they would
not so much as look at the poor creatures.

Prince Darling went up to a young girl who was trying to eat a few
blades of grass, she was so hungry. Touched with compassion, he said to
himself:

"I am very hungry, but I shall not die of starvation before I get my
dinner; if I give my breakfast to this poor creature perhaps I may save
her life."

So he laid his piece of bread in the girl's hand, and saw her eat it up
eagerly.

She soon seemed to be quite well again, and the Prince, delighted to
have been able to help her, was thinking of going home to the palace,
when he heard a great outcry, and, turning round, saw Celia, who was
being carried against her will into the great house.

For the first time the Prince regretted that he was no longer the
monster, then he would have been able to rescue Celia; now he could only
bark feebly at the people who were carrying her off, and try to follow
them, but they chased and kicked him away.

He determined not to quit the place till he knew what had become of
Celia, and blamed himself for what had befallen her.

"Alas!" he said to himself, "I am furious with the people who are
carrying Celia off, but isn't that exactly what I did myself, and if I
had not been prevented did I not intend to be still more cruel to her?"

Here he was interrupted by a noise above his head--someone was opening
a window, and he saw with delight that it was Celia herself, who came
forward and threw out a plate of most delicious-looking food, then the
window was shut again, and Prince Darling, who had not had anything to
eat all day, thought he might as well take the opportunity of getting
something. He ran forward to begin, but the young girl to whom he
had given his bread gave a cry of terror and took him up in her arms,
saying:

"Don't touch it, my poor little dog--that house is the palace of
pleasure, and everything that comes out of it is poisoned!"

At the same moment a voice said:

"You see a good action always brings its reward," and the Prince found
himself changed into a beautiful white dove. He remembered that white
was the favorite color of the Fairy Truth, and began to hope that he
might at last win back her favor. But just now his first care was for
Celia, and rising into the air he flew round and round the house, until
he saw an open window; but he searched through every room in vain. No
trace of Celia was to be seen, and the Prince, in despair, determined
to search through the world till he found her. He flew on and on for
several days, till he came to a great desert, where he saw a cavern,
and, to his delight, there sat Celia, sharing the simple breakfast of an
old hermit.

Overjoyed to have found her, Prince Darling perched upon her shoulder,
trying to express by his caresses how glad he was to see her again,
and Celia, surprised and delighted by the tameness of this pretty white
dove, stroked it softly, and said, though she never thought of its
understanding her:

"I accept the gift that you make me of yourself, and I will love you
always."

"Take care what you are saying, Celia," said the old hermit; "are you
prepared to keep that promise?"

"Indeed, I hope so, my sweet shepherdess," cried the Prince, who was
at that moment restored to his natural shape. "You promised to love me
always; tell me that you really mean what you said, or I shall have to
ask the Fairy to give me back the form of the dove which pleased you so
much."

"You need not be afraid that she will change her mind," said the Fairy,
throwing off the hermit's robe in which she had been disguised and
appearing before them.

"Celia has loved you ever since she first saw you, only she would not
tell you while you were so obstinate and naughty. Now you have repented
and mean to be good you deserve to be happy, and so she may love you as
much as she likes."

Celia and Prince Darling threw themselves at the Fairy's feet, and
the Prince was never tired of thanking her for her kindness. Celia
was delighted to hear how sorry he was for all his past follies and
misdeeds, and promised to love him as long as she lived.

"Rise, my children," said the Fairy, "and I will transport you to the
palace, and Prince Darling shall have back again the crown he forfeited
by his bad behavior."

While she was speaking, they found themselves in Suliman's hall, and his
delight was great at seeing his dear master once more. He gave up the
throne joyfully to the Prince, and remained always the most faithful of
his subjects.

Celia and Prince Darling reigned for many years, but he was so
determined to govern worthily and to do his duty that his ring, which he
took to wearing again, never once pricked him severely.(1)


(1) Cabinet des Fees.




BLUE BEARD


There was a man who had fine houses, both in town and country, a deal
of silver and gold plate, embroidered furniture, and coaches gilded all
over with gold. But this man was so unlucky as to have a blue beard,
which made him so frightfully ugly that all the women and girls ran away
from him.

One of his neighbors, a lady of quality, had two daughters who were
perfect beauties. He desired of her one of them in marriage, leaving to
her choice which of the two she would bestow on him. They would neither
of them have him, and sent him backward and forward from one another,
not being able to bear the thoughts of marrying a man who had a blue
beard, and what besides gave them disgust and aversion was his having
already been married to several wives, and nobody ever knew what became
of them.

Blue Beard, to engage their affection, took them, with the lady their
mother and three or four ladies of their acquaintance, with other young
people of the neighborhood, to one of his country seats, where they
stayed a whole week.

There was nothing then to be seen but parties of pleasure, hunting,
fishing, dancing, mirth, and feasting. Nobody went to bed, but all
passed the night in rallying and joking with each other. In short,
everything succeeded so well that the youngest daughter began to think
the master of the house not to have a beard so very blue, and that he
was a mighty civil gentleman.

As soon as they returned home, the marriage was concluded. About a
month afterward, Blue Beard told his wife that he was obliged to take
a country journey for six weeks at least, about affairs of very great
consequence, desiring her to divert herself in his absence, to send for
her friends and acquaintances, to carry them into the country, if she
pleased, and to make good cheer wherever she was.

"Here," said he, "are the keys of the two great wardrobes, wherein I
have my best furniture; these are of my silver and gold plate, which is
not every day in use; these open my strong boxes, which hold my money,
both gold and silver; these my caskets of jewels; and this is the
master-key to all my apartments. But for this little one here, it is the
key of the closet at the end of the great gallery on the ground floor.
Open them all; go into all and every one of them, except that little
closet, which I forbid you, and forbid it in such a manner that, if you
happen to open it, there's nothing but what you may expect from my just
anger and resentment."

She promised to observe, very exactly, whatever he had ordered; when
he, after having embraced her, got into his coach and proceeded on his
journey.

Her neighbors and good friends did not stay to be sent for by the
new married lady, so great was their impatience to see all the rich
furniture of her house, not daring to come while her husband was there,
because of his blue beard, which frightened them. They ran through all
the rooms, closets, and wardrobes, which were all so fine and rich that
they seemed to surpass one another.

After that they went up into the two great rooms, where was the best
and richest furniture; they could not sufficiently admire the number
and beauty of the tapestry, beds, couches, cabinets, stands, tables, and
looking-glasses, in which you might see yourself from head to foot; some
of them were framed with glass, others with silver, plain and gilded,
the finest and most magnificent ever were seen.

They ceased not to extol and envy the happiness of their friend, who in
the meantime in no way diverted herself in looking upon all these rich
things, because of the impatience she had to go and open the closet on
the ground floor. She was so much pressed by her curiosity that, without
considering that it was very uncivil to leave her company, she went
down a little back staircase, and with such excessive haste that she had
twice or thrice like to have broken her neck.

Coming to the closet-door, she made a stop for some time, thinking upon
her husband's orders, and considering what unhappiness might attend her
if she was disobedient; but the temptation was so strong she could not
overcome it. She then took the little key, and opened it, trembling, but
could not at first see anything plainly, because the windows were shut.
After some moments she began to perceive that the floor was all covered
over with clotted blood, on which lay the bodies of several dead women,
ranged against the walls. (These were all the wives whom Blue Beard had
married and murdered, one after another.) She thought she should have
died for fear, and the key, which she pulled out of the lock, fell out
of her hand.

After having somewhat recovered her surprise, she took up the key,
locked the door, and went upstairs into her chamber to recover herself;
but she could not, she was so much frightened. Having observed that the
key of the closet was stained with blood, she tried two or three times
to wipe it off, but the blood would not come out; in vain did she wash
it, and even rub it with soap and sand; the blood still remained, for
the key was magical and she could never make it quite clean; when the
blood was gone off from one side, it came again on the other.

Blue Beard returned from his journey the same evening, and said he had
received letters upon the road, informing him that the affair he went
about was ended to his advantage. His wife did all she could to convince
him she was extremely glad of his speedy return.

Next morning he asked her for the keys, which she gave him, but with
such a trembling hand that he easily guessed what had happened.

"What!" said he, "is not the key of my closet among the rest?"

"I must certainly have left it above upon the table," said she.

"Fail not to bring it to me presently," said Blue Beard.

After several goings backward and forward she was forced to bring him
the key. Blue Beard, having very attentively considered it, said to his
wife,

"How comes this blood upon the key?"

"I do not know," cried the poor woman, paler than death.

"You do not know!" replied Blue Beard. "I very well know. You were
resolved to go into the closet, were you not? Mighty well, madam; you
shall go in, and take your place among the ladies you saw there."

Upon this she threw herself at her husband's feet, and begged his pardon
with all the signs of true repentance, vowing that she would never more
be disobedient. She would have melted a rock, so beautiful and sorrowful
was she; but Blue Beard had a heart harder than any rock!

"You must die, madam," said he, "and that presently."

"Since I must die," answered she (looking upon him with her eyes all
bathed in tears), "give me some little time to say my prayers."

"I give you," replied Blue Beard, "half a quarter of an hour, but not
one moment more."

When she was alone she called out to her sister, and said to her:

"Sister Anne" (for that was her name), "go up, I beg you, upon the top
of the tower, and look if my brothers are not coming over; they promised
me that they would come to-day, and if you see them, give them a sign to
make haste."

Her sister Anne went up upon the top of the tower, and the poor
afflicted wife cried out from time to time:

"Anne, sister Anne, do you see anyone coming?"

And sister Anne said:

"I see nothing but the sun, which makes a dust, and the grass, which
looks green."

In the meanwhile Blue Beard, holding a great sabre in his hand, cried
out as loud as he could bawl to his wife:

"Come down instantly, or I shall come up to you."

"One moment longer, if you please," said his wife, and then she cried
out very softly, "Anne, sister Anne, dost thou see anybody coming?"

And sister Anne answered:

"I see nothing but the sun, which makes a dust, and the grass, which is
green."

"Come down quickly," cried Blue Beard, "or I will come up to you."

"I am coming," answered his wife; and then she cried, "Anne, sister
Anne, dost thou not see anyone coming?"

"I see," replied sister Anne, "a great dust, which comes on this side
here."

"Are they my brothers?"

"Alas! no, my dear sister, I see a flock of sheep."

"Will you not come down?" cried Blue Beard

"One moment longer," said his wife, and then she cried out: "Anne,
sister Anne, dost thou see nobody coming?"

"I see," said she, "two horsemen, but they are yet a great way off."

"God be praised," replied the poor wife joyfully; "they are my brothers;
I will make them a sign, as well as I can, for them to make haste."

Then Blue Beard bawled out so loud that he made the whole house tremble.
The distressed wife came down, and threw herself at his feet, all in
tears, with her hair about her shoulders.

"This signifies nothing," says Blue Beard; "you must die"; then, taking
hold of her hair with one hand, and lifting up the sword with the other,
he was going to take off her head. The poor lady, turning about to him,
and looking at him with dying eyes, desired him to afford her one little
moment to recollect herself.

"No, no," said he, "recommend thyself to God," and was just ready to
strike...

At this very instant there was such a loud knocking at the gate that
Blue Beard made a sudden stop. The gate was opened, and presently
entered two horsemen, who, drawing their swords, ran directly to Blue
Beard. He knew them to be his wife's brothers, one a dragoon, the other
a musketeer, so that he ran away immediately to save himself; but the
two brothers pursued so close that they overtook him before he could get
to the steps of the porch, when they ran their swords through his body
and left him dead. The poor wife was almost as dead as her husband, and
had not strength enough to rise and welcome her brothers.

Blue Beard had no heirs, and so his wife became mistress of all his
estate. She made use of one part of it to marry her sister Anne to a
young gentleman who had loved her a long while; another part to buy
captains commissions for her brothers, and the rest to marry herself to
a very worthy gentleman, who made her forget the ill time she had passed
with Blue Beard.(1)


(1) Charles Perrault.




TRUSTY JOHN


Once upon a time there was an old king who was so ill that he thought to
himself, "I am most likely on my death-bed." Then he said, "Send Trusty
John to me." Now Trusty John was his favorite servant, and was so called
because all his life he had served him so faithfully. When he approached
the bed the King spake to him: "Most trusty John, I feel my end is
drawing near, and I could face it without a care were it not for my son.
He is still too young to decide everything for himself, and unless you
promise me to instruct him in all he should know, and to be to him as a
father, I shall not close my eyes in peace." Then Trusty John answered:
"I will never desert him, and will serve him faithfully, even though it
should cost me my life." Then the old King said: "Now I die comforted
and in peace"; and then he went on: "After my death you must show him
the whole castle, all the rooms and apartments and vaults, and all the
treasures that lie in them; but you must not show him the last room in
the long passage, where the picture of the Princess of the Golden Roof
is hidden. When he beholds that picture he will fall violently in love
with it and go off into a dead faint, and for her sake he will encounter
many dangers; you must guard him from this." And when Trusty John had
again given the King his hand upon it the old man became silent, laid
his head on the pillow, and died.

When the old King had been carried to his grave Trusty John told the
young King what he had promised his father on his death-bed, and added:
"And I shall assuredly keep my word, and shall be faithful to you as I
have been to him, even though it should cost me my life."

Now when the time of mourning was over, Trusty John said to him: "It
is time you should see your inheritance. I will show you your ancestral
castle." So he took him over everything, and let him see all the riches
and splendid apartments, only the one room where the picture was he
did not open. But the picture was placed so that if the door opened
you gazed straight upon it, and it was so beautifully painted that
you imagined it lived and moved, and that it was the most lovable and
beautiful thing in the whole world. But the young King noticed that
Trusty John always missed one door, and said: "Why do you never open
this one for me?" "There is something inside that would appall you," he
answered. But the King replied: "I have seen the whole castle, and shall
find out what is in there"; and with these words he approached the door
and wanted to force it open. But Trusty John held him back, and said: "I
promised your father before his death that you shouldn't see what that
room contains. It might bring both you and me to great grief." "Ah!
no," answered the young King; "if I don't get in, it will be my certain
destruction; I should have no peace night or day till I had seen what
was in the room with my own eyes. Now I don't budge from the spot till
you have opened the door."

Then Trusty John saw there was no way out of it, so with a heavy heart
and many sighs he took the key from the big bunch. When he had opened
the door he stepped in first, and thought to cover the likeness so that
the King might not perceive it; but it was hopeless: the King stood on
tiptoe and looked over his shoulder. And when he saw the picture of the
maid, so beautiful and glittering with gold and precious stones, he fell
swooning to the ground. Trusty John lifted him up, carried him to bed,
and thought sorrowfully: "The curse has come upon us; gracious heaven!
what will be the end of it all?" Then he poured wine down his throat
till he came to himself again. The first words he spoke were: "Oh! who
is the original of the beautiful picture?" "She is the Princess of the
Golden Roof," answered Trusty John. Then the King continued: "My love
for her is so great that if all the leaves on the trees had tongues they
could not express it; my very life depends on my winning her. You are my
most trusty John: you must stand by me."

The faithful servant pondered long how they were to set about the
matter, for it was said to be difficult even to get into the presence of
the Princess. At length he hit upon a plan, and spoke to the King: "All
the things she has about her--tables, chairs, dishes, goblets, bowls,
and all her household furniture--are made of gold. You have in
your treasure five tons of gold; let the goldsmiths of your kingdom
manufacture them into all manner of vases and vessels, into all sorts of
birds and game and wonderful beasts; that will please her. We shall
go to her with them and try our luck." The King summoned all his
goldsmiths, and they had to work hard day and night, till at length the
most magnificent things were completed. When a ship had been laden with
them the faithful John disguised himself as a merchant, and the King had
to do the same, so that they should be quite unrecognizable. And so
they crossed the seas and journeyed till they reached the town where the
Princess of the Golden Roof dwelt.

Trusty John made the King remain behind on the ship and await his
return. "Perhaps," he said, "I may bring the Princess back with me, so
see that everything is in order; let the gold ornaments be arranged and
the whole ship decorated." Then he took a few of the gold things in his
apron, went ashore, and proceeded straight to the palace. When he came
to the courtyard he found a beautiful maiden standing at the well,
drawing water with two golden pails. And as she was about to carry away
the glittering water she turned round and saw the stranger, and asked
him who he was. Then he replied: "I am a merchant," and opening his
apron, he let her peep in. "Oh! my," she cried; "what beautiful gold
wares!" she set down her pails, and examined one thing after the other.
Then she said: "The Princess must see this, she has such a fancy for
gold things that she will buy up all you have." She took him by the hand
and let him into the palace, for she was the lady's maid.

When the Princess had seen the wares she was quite enchanted, and said:
"They are all so beautifully made that I shall buy everything you have."
But Trusty John said: "I am only the servant of a rich merchant, what
I have here is nothing compared to what my master has on his ship; his
merchandise is more artistic and costly than anything that has ever been
made in gold before." She desired to have everything brought up to her,
but he said: "There is such a quantity of things that it would take many
days to bring them up, and they would take up so many rooms that
you would have no space for them in your house." Thus her desire and
curiosity were excited to such an extent that at last she said: "Take me
to your ship; I shall go there myself and view your master's treasures."

Then Trusty John was quite delighted, and brought her to the ship; and
the King, when he beheld her, saw that she was even more beautiful than
her picture, and thought every moment that his heart would burst. She
stepped on to the ship, and the King led her inside. But Trusty John
remained behind with the steersman, and ordered the ship to push off.
"Spread all sail, that we may fly on the ocean like a bird in the air."
Meanwhile the King showed the Princess inside all his gold wares, every
single bit of it--dishes, goblets, bowls, the birds and game, and all
the wonderful beasts. Many hours passed thus, and she was so happy that
she did not notice that the ship was sailing away. After she had seen
the last thing she thanked the merchant and prepared to go home; but
when she came to the ship's side she saw that they were on the high
seas, far from land, and that the ship was speeding on its way under
full canvas. "Oh!" she cried in terror, "I am deceived, carried away and
betrayed into the power of a merchant; I would rather have died!" But
the King seized her hand and spake: "I am no merchant, but a king of as
high birth as yourself; and it was my great love for you that made me
carry you off by stratagem. The first time I saw your likeness I fell to
the ground in a swoon." When the Princess of the Golden Roof heard this
she was comforted, and her heart went out to him, so that she willingly
consented to become his wife.

Now it happened one day, while they were sailing on the high seas,
that Trusty John, sitting on the forepart of the ship, fiddling away to
himself, observed three ravens in the air flying toward him. He ceased
playing, and listened to what they were saying, for he understood their
language. The one croaked: "Ah, ha! so he's bringing the Princess of
the Golden Roof home." "Yes," answered the second, "but he's not got her
yet." "Yes, he has," spake the third, "for she's sitting beside him on
the ship." Then number one began again and cried: "That'll not help him!
When they reach the land a chestnut horse will dash forward to greet
them: the King will wish to mount it, and if he does it will gallop away
with him, and disappear into the air, and he will never see his bride
again." "Is there no escape for him?" asked number two. "Oh! yes, if
someone else mounts quickly and shoots the horse dead with the pistol
that is sticking in the holster, then the young King is saved. But who's
to do that? And anyone who knows it and tells him will be turned into
stone from his feet to his knees." Then spake number two: "I know more
than that: even if the horse is slain, the young King will still not
keep his bride: when they enter the palace together they will find a
ready-made wedding shirt in a cupboard, which looks as though it were
woven of gold and silver, but is really made of nothing but sulphur and
tar: when the King puts it on it will burn him to his marrow and bones."
Number three asked: "Is there no way of escape, then?" "Oh! yes,"
answered number two: "If someone seizes the shirt with gloved hands and
throws it into the fire, and lets it burn, then the young King is saved.
But what's the good? Anyone knowing this and telling it will have half
his body turned into stone, from his knees to his heart." Then number
three spake: "I know yet more: though the bridal shirt too be burnt, the
King hasn't even then secured his bride: when the dance is held after
the wedding, and the young Queen is dancing, she will suddenly grow
deadly white, and drop down like one dead, and unless some one lifts her
up and draws three drops of blood from her right side, and spits them
out again, she will die. But if anyone who knows this betrays it, he
will be turned into stone from the crown of his head to the soles of his
feet." When the ravens had thus conversed they fled onward, but Trusty
John had taken it all in, and was sad and depressed from that time
forward; for if he were silent to his master concerning what he had
heard, he would involve him in misfortune; but if he took him into his
confidence, then he himself would forfeit his life. At last he said: "I
will stand by my master, though it should be my ruin."

Now when they drew near the land it came to pass just as the ravens had
predicted, and a splendid chestnut horse bounded forward. "Capital!"
said the King; "this animal shall carry me to my palace," and was about
to mount, but Trusty John was too sharp for him, and, springing up
quickly, seized the pistol out of the holster and shot the horse dead.
Then the other servants of the King, who at no time looked favorably on
Trusty John, cried out: "What a sin to kill the beautiful beast that was
to bear the King to his palace!" But the King spake: "Silence! let him
alone; he is ever my most trusty John. Who knows for what good end he
may have done this thing?" So they went on their way and entered
the palace, and there in the hall stood a cupboard in which lay the
ready-made bridal shirt, looking for all the world as though it were
made of gold and silver. The young King went toward it and was about to
take hold of it, but Trusty John, pushing him aside, seized it with his
gloved hands, threw it hastily into the fire, and let it burn The
other servants commenced grumbling again, and said: "See, he's actually
burning the King's bridal shirt." But the young King spoke: "Who knows
for what good purpose he does it? Let him alone, he is my most trusty
John." Then the wedding was celebrated, the dance began, and the bride
joined in, but Trusty John watched her countenance carefully. Of a
sudden she grew deadly white, and fell to the ground as if she were
dead. He at once sprang hastily toward her, lifted her up, and bore her
to a room, where he laid her down, and kneeling beside her he drew three
drops of blood from her right side, and spat them out. She soon
breathed again and came to herself; but the young King had watched the
proceeding, and not knowing why Trusty John had acted as he did, he flew
into a passion, and cried: "Throw him into prison." On the following
morning sentence was passed on Trusty John, and he was condemned to be
hanged. As he stood on the gallows he said: "Every one doomed to
death has the right to speak once before he dies; and I too have that
privilege?" "Yes," said the King, "it shall be granted to you." So
Trusty John spoke: "I am unjustly condemned, for I have always been
faithful to you"; and he proceeded to relate how he had heard the
ravens' conversation on the sea, and how he had to do all he did in
order to save his master. Then the King cried: "Oh! my most trusty John,
pardon! pardon! Take him down." But as he uttered the last word Trusty
John had fallen lifeless to the ground, and was a stone.

The King and Queen were in despair, and the King spake: "Ah! how ill
have I rewarded such great fidelity!" and made them lift up the stone
image and place it in his bedroom near his bed. As often as he looked at
it he wept and said: "Oh! if I could only restore you to life, my most
trusty John!" After a time the Queen gave birth to twins, two small
sons, who throve and grew, and were a constant joy to her. One day when
the Queen was at church, and the two children sat and played with their
father, he gazed again full of grief on the stone statue, and sighing,
wailed: "Oh, if I could only restore you to life, my most trusty John!"
Suddenly the stone began to speak, and said: "Yes, you can restore me
to life again if you are prepared to sacrifice what you hold most dear."
And the King cried out: "All I have in the world will I give up for your
sake." The stone continued: "If you cut off with your own hand the heads
of your two children, and smear me with their blood, I shall come back
to life." The King was aghast when he heard that he had himself to put
his children to death; but when he thought of Trusty John's fidelity,
and how he had even died for him, he drew his sword, and with his own
hand cut the heads off his children. And when he had smeared the stone
with their blood, life came back, and Trusty John stood once more safe
and sound before him. He spake to the King: "Your loyalty shall be
rewarded," and taking up the heads of the children, he placed them on
their bodies, smeared the wounds with their blood, and in a minute they
were all right again and jumping about as if nothing had happened.
Then the King was full of joy, and when he saw the Queen coming, he hid
Trusty John and the two children in a big cupboard. As she entered he
said to her: "Did you pray in church?" "Yes," she answered, "but my
thoughts dwelt constantly on Trusty John, and of what he has suffered
for us." Then he spake: "Dear wife, we can restore him to life, but the
price asked is our two little sons; we must sacrifice them." The Queen
grew white and her heart sank, but she replied: "We owe it to him on
account of his great fidelity." Then he rejoiced that she was of the
same mind as he had been, and going forward he opened the cupboard, and
fetched the two children and Trusty John out, saying: "God be praised!
Trusty John is free once more, and we have our two small sons again."
Then he related to her all that had passed, and they lived together
happily ever afterward.(1)


(1) Grimm.




THE BRAVE LITTLE TAILOR


One summer's day a little tailor sat on his table by the window in
the best of spirits, and sewed for dear life. As he was sitting thus a
peasant woman came down the street, calling out: "Good jam to sell,
good jam to sell." This sounded sweetly in the tailor's ears; he put
his frail little head out of the window, and shouted: "up here, my good
woman, and you'll find a willing customer." The woman climbed up the
three flights of stairs with her heavy basket to the tailor's room, and
he made her spread out all the pots in a row before him. He examined
them all, lifted them up and smelled them, and said at last: "This jam
seems good, weigh me four ounces of it, my good woman; and even if it's
a quarter of a pound I won't stick at it." The woman, who had hoped to
find a good market, gave him what he wanted, but went away grumbling
wrathfully. "Now heaven shall bless this jam for my use," cried the
little tailor, "and it shall sustain and strengthen me." He fetched some
bread out of a cupboard, cut a round off the loaf, and spread the jam on
it. "That won't taste amiss," he said; "but I'll finish that waistcoat
first before I take a bite." He placed the bread beside him, went
on sewing, and out of the lightness of his heart kept on making his
stitches bigger and bigger. In the meantime the smell of the sweet jam
rose to the ceiling, where heaps of flies were sitting, and attracted
them to such an extent that they swarmed on to it in masses. "Ha! who
invited you?" said the tailor, and chased the unwelcome guests away. But
the flies, who didn't understand English, refused to let themselves
be warned off, and returned again in even greater numbers. At last the
little tailor, losing all patience, reached out of his chimney corner
for a duster, and exclaiming: "Wait, and I'll give it to you," he beat
them mercilessly with it. When he left off he counted the slain, and
no fewer than seven lay dead before him with outstretched legs. "What a
desperate fellow I am!" said he, and was filled with admiration at his
own courage. "The whole town must know about this"; and in great haste
the little tailor cut out a girdle, hemmed it, and embroidered on it in
big letters, "Seven at a blow." "What did I say, the town? no, the whole
world shall hear of it," he said; and his heart beat for joy as a lamb
wags his tail.

The tailor strapped the girdle round his waist and set out into the wide
world, for he considered his workroom too small a field for his prowess.
Before he set forth he looked round about him, to see if there was
anything in the house he could take with him on his journey; but he
found nothing except an old cheese, which he took possession of. In
front of the house he observed a bird that had been caught in some
bushes, and this he put into his wallet beside the cheese. Then he went
on his way merrily, and being light and agile he never felt tired. His
way led up a hill, on the top of which sat a powerful giant, who was
calmly surveying the landscape. The little tailor went up to him, and
greeting him cheerfully said: "Good-day, friend; there you sit at your
ease viewing the whole wide world. I'm just on my way there. What do you
say to accompanying me?" The giant looked contemptuously at the tailor,
and said: "What a poor wretched little creature you are!" "That's a good
joke," answered the little tailor, and unbuttoning his coat he showed
the giant the girdle. "There now, you can read what sort of a fellow
I am." The giant read: "Seven at a blow"; and thinking they were human
beings the tailor had slain, he conceived a certain respect for the
little man. But first he thought he'd test him, so taking up a stone in
his hand, he squeezed it till some drops of water ran out. "Now you do
the same," said the giant, "if you really wish to be thought strong."
"Is that all?" said the little tailor; "that's child's play to me," so
he dived into his wallet, brought out the cheese, and pressed it till
the whey ran out. "My squeeze was in sooth better than yours," said he.
The giant didn't know what to say, for he couldn't have believed it
of the little fellow. To prove him again, the giant lifted a stone and
threw it so high that the eye could hardly follow it. "Now, my little
pigmy, let me see you do that." "Well thrown," said the tailor; "but,
after all, your stone fell to the ground; I'll throw one that won't come
down at all." He dived into his wallet again, and grasping the bird in
his hand, he threw it up into the air. The bird, enchanted to be free,
soared up into the sky, and flew away never to return. "Well, what do
you think of that little piece of business, friend?" asked the tailor.
"You can certainly throw," said the giant; "but now let's see if you can
carry a proper weight." With these words he led the tailor to a huge oak
tree which had been felled to the ground, and said: "If you are strong
enough, help me to carry the tree out of the wood." "Most certainly,"
said the little tailor: "just you take the trunk on your shoulder; I'll
bear the top and branches, which is certainly the heaviest part." The
giant laid the trunk on his shoulder, but the tailor sat at his ease
among the branches; and the giant, who couldn't see what was going on
behind him, had to carry the whole tree, and the little tailor into the
bargain. There he sat behind in the best of spirits, lustily whistling a
tune, as if carrying the tree were mere sport. The giant, after dragging
the heavy weight for some time, could get on no further, and shouted
out: "Hi! I must let the tree fall." The tailor sprang nimbly down,
seized the tree with both hands as if he had carried it the whole way
and said to the giant: "Fancy a big lout like you not being able to
carry a tree!"

They continued to go on their way together, and as they passed by a
cherry tree the giant grasped the top of it, where the ripest fruit
hung, gave the branches into the tailor's hand, and bade him eat. But
the little tailor was far too weak to hold the tree down, and when the
giant let go the tree swung back into the air, bearing the little tailor
with it. When he had fallen to the ground again without hurting himself,
the giant said: "What! do you mean to tell me you haven't the strength
to hold down a feeble twig?" "It wasn't strength that was wanting,"
replied the tailor; "do you think that would have been anything for a
man who has killed seven at a blow? I jumped over the tree because the
huntsmen are shooting among the branches near us. Do you do the like if
you dare." The giant made an attempt, but couldn't get over the tree,
and stuck fast in the branches, so that here too the little tailor had
the better of him.

"Well, you're a fine fellow, after all," said the giant; "come and spend
the night with us in our cave." The little tailor willingly consented to
do this, and following his friend they went on till they reached a cave
where several other giants were sitting round a fire, each holding
a roast sheep in his hand, of which he was eating. The little tailor
looked about him, and thought: "Yes, there's certainly more room to turn
round in here than in my workshop." The giant showed him a bed and bade
him lie down and have a good sleep. But the bed was too big for the
little tailor, so he didn't get into it, but crept away into the corner.
At midnight, when the giant thought the little tailor was fast asleep,
he rose up, and taking his big iron walking-stick, he broke the bed
in two with a blow, and thought he had made an end of the little
grasshopper. At early dawn the giants went off to the wood, and quite
forgot about the little tailor, till all of a sudden they met him
trudging along in the most cheerful manner. The giants were terrified at
the apparition, and, fearful lest he should slay them, they all took to
their heels as fast as they could.

The little tailor continued to follow his nose, and after he had
wandered about for a long time he came to the courtyard of a royal
palace, and feeling tired he lay down on the grass and fell asleep.
While he lay there the people came, and looking him all over read on his
girdle: "Seven at a blow." "Oh!" they said, "what can this great hero of
a hundred fights want in our peaceful land? He must indeed be a mighty
man of valor." They went and told the King about him, and said what a
weighty and useful man he'd be in time of war, and that it would be well
to secure him at any price. This counsel pleased the King, and he sent
one of his courtiers down to the little tailor, to offer him, when he
awoke, a commission in their army. The messenger remained standing by
the sleeper, and waited till he stretched his limbs and opened his eyes,
when he tendered his proposal. "That's the very thing I came here for,"
he answered; "I am quite ready to enter the King's service." So he was
received with all honor, and given a special house of his own to live
in.

But the other officers resented the success of the little tailor, and
wished him a thousand miles away. "What's to come of it all?" they asked
each other; "if we quarrel with him, he'll let out at us, and at every
blow seven will fall. There'll soon be an end of us." So they resolved
to go in a body to the King, and all to send in their papers. "We are
not made," they said, "to hold out against a man who kills seven at a
blow." The King was grieved at the thought of losing all his faithful
servants for the sake of one man, and he wished heartily that he had
never set eyes on him, or that he could get rid of him. But he didn't
dare to send him away, for he feared he might kill him along with his
people, and place himself on the throne. He pondered long and deeply
over the matter, and finally came to a conclusion. He sent to the tailor
and told him that, seeing what a great and warlike hero he was, he
was about to make him an offer. In a certain wood of his kingdom there
dwelled two giants who did much harm; by the way they robbed, murdered,
burned, and plundered everything about them; "no one could approach them
without endangering his life. But if he could overcome and kill these
two giants he should have his only daughter for a wife, and half his
kingdom into the bargain; he might have a hundred horsemen, too, to back
him up." "That's the very thing for a man like me," thought the little
tailor; "one doesn't get the offer of a beautiful princess and half a
kingdom every day." "Done with you," he answered; "I'll soon put an end
to the giants. But I haven't the smallest need of your hundred horsemen;
a fellow who can slay seven men at a blow need not be afraid of two."

The little tailor set out, and the hundred horsemen followed him. When
he came to the outskirts of the wood he said to his followers: "You wait
here, I'll manage the giants by myself"; and he went on into the wood,
casting his sharp little eyes right and left about him. After a while
he spied the two giants lying asleep under a tree, and snoring till
the very boughs bent with the breeze. The little tailor lost no time in
filling his wallet with stones, and then climbed up the tree under
which they lay. When he got to about the middle of it he slipped along a
branch till he sat just above the sleepers, when he threw down one stone
after the other on the nearest giant. The giant felt nothing for a long
time, but at last he woke up, and pinching his companion said: "What did
you strike me for?" "I didn't strike you," said the other, "you must be
dreaming." They both lay down to sleep again, and the tailor threw down
a stone on the second giant, who sprang up and cried: "What's that for?
Why did you throw something at me?" "I didn't throw anything," growled
the first one. They wrangled on for a time, till, as both were tired,
they made up the matter and fell asleep again. The little tailor began
his game once more, and flung the largest stone he could find in his
wallet with all his force, and hit the first giant on the chest. "This
is too much of a good thing!" he yelled, and springing up like a madman,
he knocked his companion against the tree till he trembled. He gave,
however, as good as he got, and they became so enraged that they tore up
trees and beat each other with them, till they both fell dead at once on
the ground. Then the little tailor jumped down. "It's a mercy," he said,
"that they didn't root up the tree on which I was perched, or I should
have had to jump like a squirrel on to another, which, nimble though I
am, would have been no easy job." He drew his sword and gave each of
the giants a very fine thrust or two on the breast, and then went to
the horsemen and said: "The deed is done, I've put an end to the two of
them; but I assure you it has been no easy matter, for they even tore up
trees in their struggle to defend themselves; but all that's of no use
against one who slays seven men at a blow." "Weren't you wounded?" asked
the horsemen.

"No fear," answered the tailor; "they haven't touched a hair of my
head." But the horsemen wouldn't believe him till they rode into the
wood and found the giants weltering in their blood, and the trees lying
around, torn up by the roots.

The little tailor now demanded the promised reward from the King, but he
repented his promise, and pondered once more how he could rid himself
of the hero. "Before you obtain the hand of my daughter and half my
kingdom," he said to him, "you must do another deed of valor. A unicorn
is running about loose in the wood, and doing much mischief; you must
first catch it." "I'm even less afraid of one unicorn than of two
giants; seven at a blow, that's my motto." He took a piece of cord and
an axe with him, went out to the wood, and again told the men who had
been sent with him to remain outside. He hadn't to search long, for the
unicorn soon passed by, and, on perceiving the tailor, dashed straight
at him as though it were going to spike him on the spot. "Gently,
gently," said he, "not so fast, my friend"; and standing still he waited
till the beast was quite near, when he sprang lightly behind a tree; the
unicorn ran with all its force against the tree, and rammed its horn so
firmly into the trunk that it had no strength left to pull it out again,
and was thus successfully captured. "Now I've caught my bird," said the
tailor, and he came out from behind the tree, placed the cord round its
neck first, then struck the horn out of the tree with his axe, and when
everything was in order led the beast before the King.

Still the King didn't want to give him the promised reward and made a
third demand. The tailor was to catch a wild boar for him that did a
great deal of harm in the wood; and he might have the huntsmen to help
him. "Willingly," said the tailor; "that's mere child's play." But he
didn't take the huntsmen into the wood with him, and they were well
enough pleased to remain behind, for the wild boar had often
received them in a manner which did not make them desire its further
acquaintance. As soon as the boar perceived the tailor it ran at him
with foaming mouth and gleaming teeth, and tried to knock him down; but
our alert little friend ran into a chapel that stood near, and got out
of the window again with a jump. The boar pursued him into the church,
but the tailor skipped round to the door, and closed it securely. So the
raging beast was caught, for it was far too heavy and unwieldy to spring
out of the window. The little tailor summoned the huntsmen together,
that they might see the prisoner with their own eyes. Then the hero
betook himself to the King, who was obliged now, whether he liked it or
not, to keep his promise, and hand him over his daughter and half his
kingdom. Had he known that no hero-warrior, but only a little tailor
stood before him, it would have gone even more to his heart. So the
wedding was celebrated with much splendor and little joy, and the tailor
became a king.

After a time the Queen heard her husband saying one night in his sleep:
"My lad, make that waistcoat and patch these trousers, or I'll box your
ears." Thus she learned in what rank the young gentleman had been born,
and next day she poured forth her woes to her father, and begged him to
help her to get rid of a husband who was nothing more nor less than a
tailor. The King comforted her, and said: "Leave your bedroom door open
to-night, my servants shall stand outside, and when your husband is
fast asleep they shall enter, bind him fast, and carry him on to a
ship, which shall sail away out into the wide ocean." The Queen was
well satisfied with the idea, but the armor-bearer, who had overheard
everything, being much attached to his young master, went straight to
him and revealed the whole plot. "I'll soon put a stop to the business,"
said the tailor. That night he and his wife went to bed at the usual
time; and when she thought he had fallen asleep she got up, opened the
door, and then lay down again. The little tailor, who had only pretended
to be asleep, began to call out in a clear voice: "My lad, make that
waistcoat and patch those trousers, or I'll box your ears. I have killed
seven at a blow, slain two giants, led a unicorn captive, and caught a
wild boar, then why should I be afraid of those men standing outside my
door?" The men, when they heard the tailor saying these words, were so
terrified that they fled as if pursued by a wild army, and didn't dare
go near him again. So the little tailor was and remained a king all the
days of his life.




A VOYAGE TO LILLIPUT


CHAPTER I


My father had a small estate in Nottinghamshire, and I was the third
of four sons. He sent me to Cambridge at fourteen years old, and after
studying there three years I was bound apprentice to Mr. Bates, a famous
surgeon in London. There, as my father now and then sent me small sums
of money, I spent them in learning navigation, and other arts useful to
those who travel, as I always believed it would be some time or other my
fortune to do.

Three years after my leaving him my good master, Mr. Bates, recommended
me as ship's surgeon to the "Swallow," on which I voyaged three years.
When I came back I settled in London, and, having taken part of a
small house, I married Miss Mary Burton, daughter of Mr. Edmund Burton,
hosier.

But my good master Bates died two years after; and as I had few friends
my business began to fail, and I determined to go again to sea. After
several voyages, I accepted an offer from Captain W. Pritchard, master
of the "Antelope," who was making a voyage to the South Sea. We set sail
from Bristol, May 4, 1699; and our voyage at first was very prosperous.

But in our passage to the East Indies we were driven by a violent storm
to the north-west of Van Diemen's Land. Twelve of our crew died from
hard labor and bad food, and the rest were in a very weak condition.
On the 5th of November, the weather being very hazy, the seamen spied
a rock within 120 yards of the ship; but the wind was so strong that we
were driven straight upon it, and immediately split. Six of the crew,
of whom I was one, letting down the boat, got clear of the ship, and we
rowed about three leagues, till we could work no longer. We therefore
trusted ourselves to the mercy of the waves; and in about half an hour
the boat was upset by a sudden squall. What became of my companions in
the boat, or those who escaped on the rock or were left in the vessel,
I cannot tell; but I conclude they were all lost. For my part, I swam as
fortune directed me, and was pushed forward by wind and tide; but when
I was able to struggle no longer I found myself within my depth. By this
time the storm was much abated. I reached the shore at last, about eight
o'clock in the evening, and advanced nearly half a mile inland, but
could not discover any sign of inhabitants. I was extremely tired, and
with the heat of the weather I found myself much inclined to sleep. I
lay down on the grass, which was very short and soft, and slept sounder
than ever I did in my life for about nine hours. When I woke, it was
just daylight. I attempted to rise, but could not; for as I happened to
be lying on my back, I found my arms and legs were fastened on each side
to the ground; and my hair, which was long and thick, tied down in the
same manner. I could only look upward. The sun began to grow hot, and
the light hurt my eyes. I heard a confused noise about me, but could
see nothing except the sky. In a little time I felt something alive
and moving on my left leg, which, advancing gently over my breast, came
almost up to my chin, when, bending my eyes downward, I perceived it to
be a human creature, not six inches high, with a bow and arrow in his
hands, and a quiver at his back. In the meantime I felt at least forty
more following the first. I was in the utmost astonishment, and roared
so loud that they all ran back in a fright; and some of them were
hurt with the falls they got by leaping from my sides upon the ground.
However, they soon returned, and one of them, who ventured so far as to
get a full sight of my face, lifted up his hands in admiration. I lay
all this while in great uneasiness; but at length, struggling to get
loose, I succeeded in breaking the strings that fastened my left arm
to the ground; and at the same time, with a violent pull that gave me
extreme pain, I a little loosened the strings that tied down my hair, so
that I was just able to turn my head about two inches. But the creatures
ran off a second time before I could seize them, whereupon there was a
great shout, and in an instant I felt above a hundred arrows discharged
on my left hand, which pricked me like so many needles. Moreover, they
shot another flight into the air, of which some fell on my face, which
I immediately covered with my left hand. When this shower of arrows
was over I groaned with grief and pain, and then, striving again to get
loose, they discharged another flight of arrows larger than the first,
and some of them tried to stab me with their spears; but by good luck
I had on a leather jacket, which they could not pierce. By this time
I thought it most prudent to lie still till night, when, my left
hand being already loose, I could easily free myself; and as for the
inhabitants, I thought I might be a match for the greatest army they
could bring against me if they were all of the same size as him I
saw. When the people observed that I was quiet they discharged no more
arrows, but by the noise I heard I knew that their number was increased;
and about four yards from me, for more than an hour, there was a
knocking, like people at work. Then, turning my head that way as well
as the pegs and strings would let me, I saw a stage set up, about a foot
and a half from the ground, with two or three ladders to mount it. From
this, one of them, who seemed to be a person of quality, made me a long
speech, of which I could not understand a word, though I could tell from
his manner that he sometimes threatened me, and sometimes spoke with
pity and kindness. I answered in few words, but in the most submissive
manner; and, being almost famished with hunger, I could not help showing
my impatience by putting my finger frequently to my mouth, to signify
that I wanted food. He understood me very well, and, descending from the
stage, commanded that several ladders should be set against my sides, on
which more than a hundred of the inhabitants mounted, and walked toward
my mouth with baskets full of food, which had been sent by the King's
orders when he first received tidings of me. There were legs and
shoulders like mutton but smaller than the wings of a lark. I ate
them two or three at a mouthful, and took three loaves at a time. They
supplied me as fast as they could, with a thousand marks of wonder at
my appetite. I then made a sign that I wanted something to drink. They
guessed that a small quantity would not suffice me, and, being a most
ingenious people, they slung up one of their largest hogsheads, then
rolled it toward my hand, and beat out the top. I drank it off at a
draught, which I might well do, for it did not hold half a pint. They
brought me a second hogshead, which I drank, and made signs for more;
but they had none to give me. However, I could not wonder enough at the
daring of these tiny mortals, who ventured to mount and walk upon my
body, while one of my hands was free, without trembling at the very
sight of so huge a creature as I must have seemed to them. After some
time there appeared before me a person of high rank from his Imperial
Majesty. His Excellency, having mounted my right leg, advanced to my
face, with about a dozen of his retinue, and spoke about ten minutes,
often pointing forward, which, as I afterward found, was toward the
capital city, about half a mile distant, whither it was commanded by his
Majesty that I should be conveyed. I made a sign with my hand that was
loose, putting it to the other (but over his Excellency's head, for
fear of hurting him or his train), to show that I desired my liberty.
He seemed to understand me well enough, for he shook his head, though
he made other signs to let me know that I should have meat and drink
enough, and very good treatment. Then I once more thought of attempting
to escape; but when I felt the smart of their arrows on my face and
hands, which were all in blisters and observed likewise that the number
of my enemies increased, I gave tokens to let them know that they might
do with me what they pleased. Then they daubed my face and hands with a
sweet-smelling ointment, which in a few minutes removed all the smarts
of the arrows. The relief from pain and hunger made me drowsy, and
presently I fell asleep. I slept about eight hours, as I was told
afterward; and it was no wonder, for the physicians, by the Emperor's
orders, had mingled a sleeping draught in the hogsheads of wine.

It seems that, when I was discovered sleeping on the ground after my
landing, the Emperor had early notice of it, and determined that I
should be tied in the manner I have related (which was done in the
night, while I slept), that plenty of meat and drink should be sent me,
and a machine prepared to carry me to the capital city. Five hundred
carpenters and engineers were immediately set to work to prepare the
engine. It was a frame of wood, raised three inches from the ground,
about seven feet long and four wide, moving upon twenty-two wheels. But
the difficulty was to place me on it. Eighty poles were erected for this
purpose, and very strong cords fastened to bandages which the workmen
had tied round my neck, hands, body, and legs. Nine hundred of the
strongest men were employed to draw up these cords by pulleys fastened
on the poles, and in less than three hours I was raised and slung
into the engine, and there tied fast. Fifteen hundred of the Emperor's
largest horses, each about four inches and a half high, were then
employed to draw me toward the capital. But while all this was done I
still lay in a deep sleep, and I did not wake till four hours after we
began our journey.

The Emperor and all his Court came out to meet us when we reached the
capital; but his great officials would not suffer his Majesty to risk
his person by mounting on my body. Where the carriage stopped there
stood an ancient temple, supposed to be the largest in the whole
kingdom, and here it was determined that I should lodge. Near the great
gate, through which I could easily creep, they fixed ninety-one chains,
like those which hang to a lady's watch, which were locked to my
left leg with thirty-six padlocks; and when the workmen found it was
impossible for me to break loose, they cut all the strings that bound
me. Then I rose up, feeling as melancholy as ever I did in my life. But
the noise and astonishment of the people on seeing me rise and walk were
inexpressible. The chains that held my left leg were about two yards
long, and gave me not only freedom to walk backward and forward in a
semicircle, but to creep in and lie at full length inside the temple.
The Emperor, advancing toward me from among his courtiers, all most
magnificently clad, surveyed me with great admiration, but kept beyond
the length of my chain. He was taller by about the breadth of my nail
than any of his Court, which alone was enough to strike awe into the
beholders, and graceful and majestic. The better to behold him, I lay
down on my side, so that my face was level with his, and he stood three
yards off. However, I have had him since many times in my hand, and
therefore cannot be deceived. His dress was very simple; but he wore a
light helmet of gold, adorned with jewels and a plume. He held his sword
drawn in his hand, to defend himself if I should break loose; it was
almost three inches long, and the hilt was of gold, enriched with
diamonds. His voice was shrill, but very clear. His Imperial Majesty
spoke often to me, and I answered; but neither of us could understand a
word.


CHAPTER II


After about two hours the Court retired, and I was left with a strong
guard to keep away the crowd, some of whom had had the impudence to
shoot their arrows at me as I sat by the door of my house. But the
colonel ordered six of them to be seized and delivered bound into my
hands. I put five of them into my coat pocket; and as to the sixth, I
made a face as if I would eat him alive. The poor man screamed terribly,
and the colonel and his officers were much distressed, especially when
they saw me take out my penknife. But I soon set them at ease, for,
cutting the strings he was bound with, I put him gently on the ground,
and away he ran. I treated the rest in the same manner, taking them one
by one out of my pocket; and I saw that both the soldiers and people
were delighted at this mark of my kindness.

Toward night I got with some difficulty into my house, where I lay on
the ground, as I had to do for a fortnight, till a bed was prepared for
me out of six hundred beds of the ordinary measure.

Six hundred servants were appointed me, and three hundred tailors made
me a suit of clothes. Moreover, six of his Majesty's greatest scholars
were employed to teach me their language, so that soon I was able to
converse after a fashion with the Emperor, who often honored me with his
visits. The first words I learned were to desire that he would please
to give me my liberty, which I every day repeated on my knees; but he
answered that this must be a work of time, and that first I must swear a
peace with him and his kingdom. He told me also that by the laws of the
nation I must be searched by two of his officers, and that as this could
not be done without my help, he trusted them in my hands, and whatever
they took from me should be returned when I left the country. I took up
the two officers, and put them into my coat pockets. These gentlemen,
having pen, ink, and paper about them, made an exact list of everything
they saw, which I afterward translated into English, and which ran as
follows:

"In the right coat pocket of the great Man-Mountain we found only one
great piece of coarse cloth, large enough to cover the carpet of your
Majesty's chief room of state. In the left pocket we saw a huge silver
chest, with a silver cover, which we could not lift. We desired that it
should be opened, and one of us stepping into it found himself up to the
mid-leg in a sort of dust, some of which flying into our faces sent us
both into a fit of sneezing. In his right waistcoat pocket we found a
number of white thin substances, folded one over another, about the size
of three men, tied with a strong cable, and marked with black figures,
which we humbly conceive to be writings. In the left there was a sort of
engine, from the back of which extended twenty long poles, with which,
we conjecture, the Man-Mountain combs his head. In the smaller pocket on
the right side were several round flat pieces of white and red metal, of
different sizes. Some of the white, which appeared to be silver, were
so large and heavy that my comrade and I could hardly lift them. From
another pocket hung a huge silver chain, with a wonderful kind of engine
fastened to it, a globe half silver and half of some transparent metal;
for on the transparent side we saw certain strange figures, and thought
we could touch them till we found our fingers stopped by the shining
substance. This engine made an incessant noise, like a water-mill, and
we conjecture it is either some unknown animal, or the god he worships,
but probably the latter, for he told us that he seldom did anything
without consulting it.

"This is a list of what we found about the body of the Man-Mountain, who
treated us with great civility."

I had one private pocket which escaped their search, containing a pair
of spectacles and a small spy-glass, which, being of no consequence to
the Emperor, I did not think myself bound in honor to discover.


CHAPTER III


My gentleness and good behavior gained so far on the Emperor and his
Court, and, indeed, on the people in general, that I began to have hopes
of getting my liberty in a short time. The natives came by degrees to be
less fearful of danger from me. I would sometimes lie down and let five
or six of them dance on my hand; and at last the boys and girls ventured
to come and play at hide-and-seek in my hair.

The horses of the army and of the royal stables were no longer shy,
having been daily led before me; and one of the Emperor's huntsmen, on a
large courser, took my foot, shoe and all, which was indeed a prodigious
leap. I amused the Emperor one day in a very extraordinary manner. I
took nine sticks, and fixed them firmly in the ground in a square. Then
I took four other sticks, and tied them parallel at each corner, about
two feet from the ground. I fastened my handkerchief to the nine sticks
that stood erect, and extended it on all sides till it was as tight as
the top of a drum; and I desired the Emperor to let a troop of his best
horse, twenty-four in number, come and exercise upon this plain. His
majesty approved of the proposal, and I took them up one by one, with
the proper officers to exercise them. As soon as they got into order
they divided into two parties, discharged blunt arrows, drew their
swords, fled and pursued, and, in short, showed the best military
discipline I ever beheld. The parallel sticks secured them and their
horses from falling off the stage, and the Emperor was so much delighted
that he ordered this entertainment to be repeated several days, and
persuaded the Empress herself to let me hold her in her chair within
two yards of the stage, whence she could view the whole performance.
Fortunately no accident happened, only once a fiery horse, pawing with
his hoof, struck a hole in my handkerchief, and overthrew his rider and
himself. But I immediately relieved them both, and covering the hole
with one hand, I set down the troop with the other as I had taken them
up. The horse that fell was strained in the shoulder; but the rider was
not hurt, and I repaired my handkerchief as well as I could. However,
I would not trust to the strength of it any more in such dangerous
enterprises.

I had sent so many petitions for my liberty that his Majesty at length
mentioned the matter in a full council, where it was opposed by none
except Skyresh Bolgolam, admiral of the realm, who was pleased without
any provocation to be my mortal enemy. However, he agreed at length,
though he succeeded in himself drawing up the conditions on which I
should be set free. After they were read I was requested to swear to
perform them in the method prescribed by their laws, which was to hold
my right foot in my left hand, and to place the middle finger of my
right hand on the crown of my head, and my thumb on the top of my right
ear. But I have made a translation of the conditions, which I here offer
to the public:

"Golbaste Mamarem Evlame Gurdile Shefin Mully Ully Gue, Most Mighty
Emperor of Lilliput, delight and terror of the universe, whose dominions
extend to the ends of the globe, monarch of all monarchs, taller than
the sons of men, whose feet press down to the center, and whose head
strikes against the sun, at whose nod the princes of the earth shake
their knees, pleasant as the spring, comfortable as the summer, fruitful
as autumn, dreadful as winter: His Most Sublime Majesty proposeth to the
Man-Mountain, lately arrived at our celestial dominions, the following
articles, which by a solemn oath he shall be obliged to perform:

"First. The Man-Mountain shall not depart from our dominions without our
license under the great seal.

"Second. He shall not presume to come into our metropolis without our
express order, at which time the inhabitants shall have two hours'
warning to keep within doors.

"Third. The said Man-Mountain shall confine his walks to our principal
high roads, and not offer to walk or lie down in a meadow or field of
corn.

"Fourth. As he walks the said roads he shall take the utmost care not to
trample upon the bodies of any of our loving subjects, their horses or
carriages, nor take any of our subjects into his hands without their own
consent.

"Fifth. If an express requires extraordinary speed the Man-Mountain
shall be obliged to carry in his pocket the messenger and horse a six
days' journey, and return the said messenger (if so required) safe to
our imperial presence.

"Sixth. He shall be our ally against our enemies in the island of
Blefuscu, and do his utmost to destroy their fleet, which is now
preparing to invade us.

"Lastly. Upon his solemn oath to observe all the above articles,
the said Man-Mountain shall have a daily allowance of meat and drink
sufficient for the support of 1,724 of our subjects, with free access to
our royal person, and other marks of our favor. Given at our palace at
Belfaburac, the twelfth day of the ninety-first moon of our reign."

I swore to these articles with great cheerfulness, whereupon my chains
were immediately unlocked, and I was at full liberty.

One morning, about a fortnight after I had obtained my freedom,
Reldresal, the Emperor's secretary for private affairs, came to my
house, attended only by one servant. He ordered his coach to wait at
a distance, and desired that I would give him an hour's audience. I
offered to lie down that he might the more conveniently reach my
ear; but he chose rather to let me hold him in my hand during our
conversation. He began with compliments on my liberty, but he added
that, save for the present state of things at Court, perhaps I might not
have obtained it so soon. "For," he said, "however flourishing we may
seem to foreigners, we are in danger of an invasion from the island of
Blefuscu, which is the other great empire of the universe, almost as
large and as powerful as this of his Majesty. For as to what we have
heard you say, that there are other kingdoms in the world, inhabited
by human creatures as large as yourself, our philosophers are very
doubtful, and rather conjecture that you dropped from the moon, or one
of the stars, because a hundred mortals of your size would soon destroy
all the fruit and cattle of his Majesty's dominions. Besides, our
histories of six thousand moons make no mention of any other regions
than the two mighty empires of Lilliput and Blefuscu, which, as I was
going to tell you, are engaged in a most obstinate war, which began in
the following manner: It is allowed on all hands that the primitive
way of breaking eggs was upon the larger end; but his present Majesty's
grandfather, while he was a boy, going to eat an egg, and breaking it
according to the ancient practice, happened to cut one of his fingers.
Whereupon the Emperor, his father, made a law commanding all his
subjects to break the smaller end of their eggs. The people so highly
resented this law that there have been six rebellions raised on that
account, wherein one emperor lost his life, and another his crown. It is
calculated that eleven hundred persons have at different times suffered
rather than break their eggs at the smaller end. But these rebels,
the Bigendians, have found so much encouragement at the Emperor of
Blefuscu's Court, to which they always fled for refuge, that a bloody
war, as I said, has been carried on between the two empires for
six-and-thirty moons; and now the Blefuscudians have equipped a large
fleet, and are preparing to descend upon us. Therefore his Imperial
Majesty, placing great confidence in your valor and strength, has
commanded me to set the case before you."

I desired the secretary to present my humble duty to the Emperor, and
to let him know that I was ready, at the risk of my life, to defend him
against all invaders.


CHAPTER IV


It was not long before I communicated to his Majesty the plan I formed
for seizing the enemy's whole fleet. The Empire of Blefuscu is an island
parted from Lilliput only by a channel eight hundred yards wide. I
consulted the most experienced seamen on the depth of the channel, and
they told me that in the middle, at high water, it was seventy glumguffs
(about six feet of European measure). I walked toward the coast, where,
lying down behind a hillock, I took out my spy-glass, and viewed the
enemy's fleet at anchor--about fifty men-of-war, and other vessels. I
then came back to my house and gave orders for a great quantity of
the strongest cables and bars of iron. The cable was about as thick as
packthread, and the bars of the length and size of a knitting-needle. I
trebled the cable to make it stronger, and for the same reason twisted
three of the iron bars together, bending the ends into a hook. Having
thus fixed fifty hooks to as many cables, I went back to the coast,
and taking off my coat, shoes, and stockings, walked into the sea in my
leather jacket about half an hour before high water. I waded with what
haste I could, swimming in the middle about thirty yards, till I felt
ground, and thus arrived at the fleet in less than half an hour. The
enemy was so frightened when they saw me that they leaped out of their
ships and swam ashore, where there could not be fewer than thirty
thousand. Then, fastening a hook to the hole at the prow of each ship,
I tied all the cords together at the end. Meanwhile the enemy discharged
several thousand arrows, many of which stuck in my hands and face. My
greatest fear was for my eyes, which I should have lost if I had
not suddenly thought of the pair of spectacles which had escaped the
Emperor's searchers. These I took out and fastened upon my nose, and
thus armed went on with my work in spite of the arrows, many of which
struck against the glasses of my spectacles, but without any other
effect than slightly disturbing them. Then, taking the knot in my hand,
I began to pull; but not a ship would stir, for they were too fast
held by their anchors. Thus the boldest part of my enterprise remained.
Letting go the cord, I resolutely cut with my knife the cables that
fastened the anchors, receiving more than two hundred shots in my face
and hands. Then I took up again the knotted end of the cables to which
my hooks were tied, and with great ease drew fifty of the enemy's
largest men-of-war after me.

When the Blefuscudians saw the fleet moving in order, and me pulling at
the end, they set up a scream of grief and despair that it is impossible
to describe. When I had got out of danger I stopped awhile to pick out
the arrows that stuck in my hands and face, and rubbed on some of
the same ointment that was given me at my arrival. I then took off my
spectacles, and after waiting about an hour, till the tide was a little
fallen, I waded on to the royal port of Lilliput.

The Emperor and his whole Court stood on the shore awaiting me. They saw
the ships move forward in a large half-moon, but could not discern me,
who, in the middle of the channel, was under water up to my neck. The
Emperor concluded that I was drowned, and that the enemy's fleet was
approaching in a hostile manner. But he was soon set at ease, for, the
channel growing shallower every step I made, I came in a short time
within hearing, and holding up the end of the cable by which the fleet
was fastened, I cried in a loud voice: "Long live the most puissant
Emperor of Lilliput!" The Prince received me at my landing with all
possible joy, and made me a Nardal on the spot, which is the highest
title of honor among them.

His Majesty desired that I would take some opportunity to bring all the
rest of his enemy's ships into his ports, and seemed to think of nothing
less than conquering the whole Empire of Blefuscu, and becoming the sole
monarch of the world. But I plainly protested that I would never be the
means of bringing a free and brave people into slavery; and though
the wisest of the Ministers were of my opinion, my open refusal was so
opposed to his Majesty's ambition that he could never forgive me. And
from this time a plot began between himself and those of his Ministers
who were my enemies, that nearly ended in my utter destruction.

About three weeks after this exploit there arrived an embassy from
Blefuscu, with humble offers of peace, which was soon concluded, on
terms very advantageous to our Emperor. There were six ambassadors, with
a train of about five hundred persons, all very magnificent. Having been
privately told that I had befriended them, they made me a visit, and
paying me many compliments on my valor and generosity, invited me
to their kingdom in the Emperor their master's name. I asked them to
present my most humble respects to the Emperor their master, whose
royal person I resolved to attend before I returned to my own country.
Accordingly, the next time I had the honor to see our Emperor I desired
his general permission to visit the Blefuscudian monarch. This he
granted me, but in a very cold manner, of which I afterward learned the
reason.

When I was just preparing to pay my respects to the Emperor of Blefuscu,
a distinguished person at Court, to whom I had once done a great
service, came to my house very privately at night, and without sending
his name desired admission. I put his lordship into my coat pocket, and,
giving orders to a trusty servant to admit no one, I fastened the door,
placed my visitor on the table, and sat down by it. His lordship's face
was full of trouble; and he asked me to hear him with patience, in a
matter that highly concerned my honor and my life.

"You are aware," he said, "that Skyresh Bolgolam has been your mortal
enemy ever since your arrival, and his hatred is increased since
your great success against Blefuscu, by which his glory as admiral is
obscured. This lord and others have accused you of treason, and several
councils have been called in the most private manner on your account.
Out of gratitude for your favors I procured information of the whole
proceedings, venturing my head for your service, and this was the charge
against you:

"First, that you, having brought the imperial fleet of Blefuscu into the
royal port, were commanded by his Majesty to seize all the other ships,
and put to death all the Bigendian exiles, and also all the people of
the empire who would not immediately consent to break their eggs at the
smaller end. And that, like a false traitor to his Most Serene Majesty,
you excused yourself from the service on pretence of unwillingness to
force the consciences and destroy the liberties and lives of an innocent
people.

"Again, when ambassadors arrived from the Court of Blefuscu, like a
false traitor, you aided and entertained them, though you knew them to
be servants of a prince lately in open war against his Imperial Majesty.

"Moreover, you are now preparing, contrary to the duty of a faithful
subject, to voyage to the Court of Blefuscu.

"In the debate on this charge," my friend continued, "his Majesty often
urged the services you had done him, while the admiral and treasurer
insisted that you should be put to a shameful death. But Reldresal,
secretary for private affairs, who has always proved himself your friend
suggested that if his Majesty would please to spare your life and only
give orders to put out both your eyes, justice might in some measure be
satisfied. At this Bolgolam rose up in fury, wondering how the secretary
dared desire to preserve the life of a traitor; and the treasurer,
pointing out the expense of keeping you, also urged your death. But his
Majesty was graciously pleased to say that since the council thought the
loss of your eyes too easy a punishment, some other might afterward be
inflicted. And the secretary, humbly desiring to be heard again, said
that as to expense your allowance might be gradually lessened, so that,
for want of sufficient food you should grow weak and faint, and die in
a few months, when his Majesty's subjects might cut your flesh from your
bones and bury it, leaving the skeleton for the admiration of posterity.

"Thus, through the great friendship of the secretary the affair was
arranged. It was commanded that the plan of starving you by degrees
should be kept a secret; but the sentence of putting out your eyes was
entered on the books. In three days your friend the secretary will come
to your house and read the accusation before you, and point out the
great mercy of his Majesty, that only condemns you to the loss of
your eyes--which, he does not doubt, you will submit to humbly and
gratefully. Twenty of his Majesty's surgeons will attend, to see the
operation well performed, by discharging very sharp-pointed arrows into
the balls of your eyes as you lie on the ground.

"I leave you," said my friend, "to consider what measures you will take;
and, to escape suspicion, I must immediately return, as secretly as I
came."

His lordship did so; and I remained alone, in great perplexity. At first
I was bent on resistance; for while I had liberty I could easily with
stones pelt the metropolis to pieces; but I soon rejected that idea with
horror, remembering the oath I had made to the Emperor, and the favors
I had received from him. At last, having his Majesty's leave to pay
my respects to the Emperor of Blefuscu, I resolved to take this
opportunity. Before the three days had passed I wrote a letter to my
friend the secretary telling him of my resolution; and, without waiting
for an answer, went to the coast, and entering the channel, between
wading and swimming reached the port of Blefuscu, where the people, who
had long expected me, led me to the capital.

His Majesty, with the royal family and great officers of the Court, came
out to receive me, and they entertained me in a manner suited to the
generosity of so great a prince. I did not, however, mention my disgrace
with the Emperor of Lilliput, since I did not suppose that prince would
disclose the secret while I was out of his power. But in this, it soon
appeared, I was deceived.


CHAPTER V


Three days after my arrival, walking out of curiosity to the northeast
coast of the island, I observed at some distance in the sea something
that looked like a boat overturned. I pulled off my shoes and stockings,
and wading two or three hundred yards, I plainly saw it to be a real
boat, which I supposed might by some tempest have been driven from a
ship. I returned immediately to the city for help, and after a huge
amount of labor I managed to get my boat to the royal port of Blefuscu,
where a great crowd of people appeared, full of wonder at sight of so
prodigious a vessel. I told the Emperor that my good fortune had thrown
this boat in my way to carry me to some place whence I might return to
my native country, and begged his orders for materials to fit it up, and
leave to depart--which, after many kindly speeches, he was pleased to
grant.

Meanwhile the Emperor of Lilliput, uneasy at my long absence (but never
imagining that I had the least notice of his designs), sent a person of
rank to inform the Emperor of Blefuscu of my disgrace; this messenger
had orders to represent the great mercy of his master, who was content
to punish me with the loss of my eyes, and who expected that his brother
of Blefuscu would have me sent back to Lilliput, bound hand and foot,
to be punished as a traitor. The Emperor of Blefuscu answered with many
civil excuses. He said that as for sending me bound, his brother knew
it was impossible. Moreover, though I had taken away his fleet he was
grateful to me for many good offices I had done him in making the peace.
But that both their Majesties would soon be made easy; for I had found
a prodigious vessel on the shore, able to carry me on the sea, which
he had given orders to fit up; and he hoped in a few weeks both empires
would be free from me.

With this answer the messenger returned to Lilliput; and I (though the
monarch of Blefuscu secretly offered me his gracious protection if I
would continue in his service) hastened my departure, resolving never
more to put confidence in princes.

In about a month I was ready to take leave. The Emperor of Blefuscu,
with the Empress and the royal family, came out of the palace; and I lay
down on my face to kiss their hands, which they graciously gave me. His
Majesty presented me with fifty purses of sprugs (their greatest gold
coin) and his picture at full length, which I put immediately into one
of my gloves, to keep it from being hurt. Many other ceremonies took
place at my departure.

I stored the boat with meat and drink, and took six cows and two bulls
alive, with as many ewes and rams, intending to carry them into my own
country; and to feed them on board, I had a good bundle of hay and a bag
of corn. I would gladly have taken a dozen of the natives; but this was
a thing the Emperor would by no means permit, and besides a diligent
search into my pockets, his Majesty pledged my honor not to carry away
any of his subjects, though with their own consent and desire.

Having thus prepared all things as well as I was able, I set sail. When
I had made twenty-four leagues, by my reckoning, from the island of
Blefuscu, I saw a sail steering to the northeast. I hailed her, but
could get no answer; yet I found I gained upon her, for the wind
slackened; and in half an hour she spied me, and discharged a gun. I
came up with her between five and six in the evening, Sept. 26, 1701;
but my heart leaped within me to see her English colors. I put my cows
and sheep into my coat pockets, and got on board with all my little
cargo. The captain received me with kindness, and asked me to tell him
what place I came from last; but at my answer he thought I was raving.
However, I took my black cattle and sheep out of my pocket, which, after
great astonishment, clearly convinced him.

We arrived in England on the 13th of April, 1702. I stayed two months
with my wife and family; but my eager desire to see foreign countries
would suffer me to remain no longer. However, while in England I made
great profit by showing my cattle to persons of quality and others; and
before I began my second voyage I sold them for 600_l_. I left 1500_l_.
with my wife, and fixed her in a good house; then taking leave of her
and my boy and girl, with tears on both sides, I sailed on board the
"Adventure."(1)


(1) Swift.




THE PRINCESS ON THE GLASS HILL


Once upon a time there was a man who had a meadow which lay on the side
of a mountain, and in the meadow there was a barn in which he stored
hay. But there had not been much hay in the barn for the last two years,
for every St. John's eve, when the grass was in the height of its vigor,
it was all eaten clean up, just as if a whole flock of sheep had gnawed
it down to the ground during the night. This happened once, and it
happened twice, but then the man got tired of losing his crop, and
said to his sons--he had three of them, and the third was called
Cinderlad--that one of them must go and sleep in the barn on St. John's
night, for it was absurd to let the grass be eaten up again, blade and
stalk, as it had been the last two years, and the one who went to watch
must keep a sharp look-out, the man said.

The eldest was quite willing to go to the meadow; he would watch the
grass, he said, and he would do it so well that neither man, nor beast,
nor even the devil himself should have any of it. So when evening came
he went to the barn, and lay down to sleep, but when night was drawing
near there was such a rumbling and such an earthquake that the walls and
roof shook again, and the lad jumped up and took to his heels as fast as
he could, and never even looked back, and the barn remained empty that
year just as it had been for the last two.

Next St. John's eve the man again said that he could not go on in this
way, losing all the grass in the outlying field year after year, and
that one of his sons must just go there and watch it, and watch well
too. So the next oldest son was willing to show what he could do. He
went to the barn and lay down to sleep, as his brother had done; but
when night was drawing near there was a great rumbling, and then an
earthquake, which was even worse than that on the former St. John's
night, and when the youth heard it he was terrified, and went off,
running as if for a wager.

The year after, it was Cinderlad's turn, but when he made ready to go
the others laughed at him, and mocked him. "Well, you are just the right
one to watch the hay, you who have never learned anything but how to sit
among the ashes and bake yourself!" said they. Cinderlad, however, did
not trouble himself about what they said, but when evening drew near
rambled away to the outlying field. When he got there he went into the
barn and lay down, but in about an hour's time the rumbling and creaking
began, and it was frightful to hear it. "Well, if it gets no worse than
that, I can manage to stand it," thought Cinderlad. In a little time
the creaking began again, and the earth quaked so that all the hay flew
about the boy. "Oh! if it gets no worse than that I can manage to stand
it," thought Cinderlad. But then came a third rumbling, and a third
earthquake, so violent that the boy thought the walls and roof had
fallen down, but when that was over everything suddenly grew as still
as death around him. "I am pretty sure that it will come again," thought
Cinderlad; but no, it did not. Everything was quiet, and everything
stayed quiet, and when he had lain still a short time he heard something
that sounded as if a horse were standing chewing just outside the barn
door. He stole away to the door, which was ajar, to see what was there,
and a horse was standing eating. It was so big, and fat, and fine a
horse that Cinderlad had never seen one like it before, and a saddle
and bridle lay upon it, and a complete suit of armor for a knight, and
everything was of copper, and so bright that it shone again. "Ha, ha! it
is thou who eatest up our hay then," thought the boy; "but I will stop
that." So he made haste, and took out his steel for striking fire, and
threw it over the horse, and then it had no power to stir from the spot,
and became so tame that the boy could do what he liked with it. So he
mounted it and rode away to a place which no one knew of but himself,
and there he tied it up. When he went home again his brothers laughed
and asked how he had got on.

"You didn't lie long in the barn, if even you have been so far as the
field!" said they.

"I lay in the barn till the sun rose, but I saw nothing and heard
nothing, not I," said the boy. "God knows what there was to make you two
so frightened."

"Well, we shall soon see whether you have watched the meadow or not,"
answered the brothers, but when they got there the grass was all
standing just as long and as thick as it had been the night before.

The next St. John's eve it was the same thing, once again: neither of
the two brothers dared to go to the outlying field to watch the crop,
but Cinderlad went, and everything happened exactly the same as on the
previous St. John's eve: first there was a rumbling and an earthquake,
and then there was another, and then a third: but all three earthquakes
were much, very much more violent than they had been the year before.
Then everything became still as death again, and the boy heard something
chewing outside the barn door, so he stole as softly as he could to
the door, which was slightly ajar, and again there was a horse standing
close by the wall of the house, eating and chewing, and it was far
larger and fatter than the first horse, and it had a saddle on its back,
and a bridle was on it too, and a full suit of armor for a knight, all
of bright silver, and as beautiful as anyone could wish to see. "Ho,
ho!" thought the boy, "is it thou who eatest up our hay in the night?
but I will put a stop to that." So he took out his steel for striking
fire, and threw it over the horse's mane, and the beast stood there as
quiet as a lamb. Then the boy rode this horse, too, away to the place
where he kept the other, and then went home again.

"I suppose you will tell us that you have watched well again this time,"
said the brothers.

"Well, so I have," said Cinderlad. So they went there again, and there
the grass was, standing as high and as thick as it had been before, but
that did not make them any kinder to Cinderlad.

When the third St. John's night came neither of the two elder brothers
dared to lie in the outlying barn to watch the grass, for they had been
so heartily frightened the night that they had slept there that they
could not get over it, but Cinderlad dared to go, and everything
happened just the same as on the two former nights. There were three
earthquakes, each worse than the other, and the last flung the boy from
one wall of the barn to the other, but then everything suddenly
became still as death. When he had lain quietly a short time, he heard
something chewing outside the barn door; then he once more stole to the
door, which was slightly ajar, and behold, a horse was standing just
outside it, which was much larger and fatter than the two others he had
caught. "Ho, ho! it is thou, then, who art eating up our hay this time,"
thought the boy; "but I will put a stop to that." So he pulled out his
steel for striking fire, and threw it over the horse, and it stood as
still as if it had been nailed to the field, and the boy could do just
what he liked with it. Then he mounted it and rode away to the place
where he had the two others, and then he went home again. Then the two
brothers mocked him just as they had done before, and told him that they
could see that he must have watched the grass very carefully that night,
for he looked just as if he were walking in his sleep; but Cinderlad did
not trouble himself about that, but just bade them go to the field and
see. They did go, and this time too the grass was standing, looking as
fine and as thick as ever.

The King of the country in which Cinderlad's father dwelt had a daughter
whom he would give to no one who could not ride up to the top of the
glass hill, for there was a high, high hill of glass, slippery as ice,
and it was close to the King's palace. Upon the very top of this the
King's daughter was to sit with three gold apples in her lap, and the
man who could ride up and take the three golden apples should marry her,
and have half the kingdom. The King had this proclaimed in every church
in the whole kingdom, and in many other kingdoms too. The Princess was
very beautiful, and all who saw her fell violently in love with her,
even in spite of themselves. So it is needless to say that all the
princes and knights were eager to win her, and half the kingdom besides,
and that for this cause they came riding thither from the very end of
the world, dressed so splendidly that their raiments gleamed in the
sunshine, and riding on horses which seemed to dance as they went, and
there was not one of these princes who did not think that he was sure to
win the Princess.

When the day appointed by the King had come, there was such a host of
knights and princes under the glass hill that they seemed to swarm, and
everyone who could walk or even creep was there too, to see who won the
King's daughter. Cinderlad's two brothers were there too, but they would
not hear of letting him go with them, for he was so dirty and black
with sleeping and grubbing among the ashes that they said everyone would
laugh at them if they were seen in the company of such an oaf.

"Well, then, I will go all alone by myself," said Cinderlad.

When the two brothers got to the glass hill, all the princes and knights
were trying to ride up it, and their horses were in a foam; but it was
all in vain, for no sooner did the horses set foot upon the hill than
down they slipped, and there was not one which could get even so much as
a couple of yards up. Nor was that strange, for the hill was as smooth
as a glass window-pane, and as steep as the side of a house. But they
were all eager to win the King's daughter and half the kingdom, so they
rode and they slipped, and thus it went on. At length all the horses
were so tired that they could do no more, and so hot that the foam
dropped from them and the riders were forced to give up the attempt. The
King was just thinking that he would cause it to be proclaimed that the
riding should begin afresh on the following day, when perhaps it might
go better, when suddenly a knight came riding up on so fine a horse that
no one had ever seen the like of it before, and the knight had armor of
copper, and his bridle was of copper too, and all his accoutrements were
so bright that they shone again. The other knights all called out to him
that he might just as well spare himself the trouble of trying to ride
up the glass hill, for it was of no use to try; but he did not heed
them, and rode straight off to it, and went up as if it were nothing at
all. Thus he rode for a long way--it may have been a third part of the
way up--but when he had got so far he turned his horse round and rode
down again. But the Princess thought that she had never yet seen so
handsome a knight, and while he was riding up she was sitting thinking,
"Oh! how I hope he may be able to come up to the top!" And when she saw
that he was turning his horse back she threw one of the golden apples
down after him, and it rolled into his shoe. But when he had come down
from off the hill he rode away, and that so fast that no one knew what
had become of him.

So all the princes and knights were bidden to present themselves before
the King that night, so that he who had ridden so far up the glass hill
might show the golden apple which the King's daughter had thrown down.
But no one had anything to show. One knight presented himself after the
other, and none could show the apple.

At night, too, Cinderlad's brothers came home again and had a long story
to tell about riding up the glass hill. At first, they said, there was
not one who was able to get even so much as one step up, but then came
a knight who had armor of copper, and a bridle of copper, and his armor
and trappings were so bright that they shone to a great distance, and it
was something like a sight to see him riding. He rode one-third of the
way up the glass hill, and he could easily have ridden the whole of it
if he had liked; but he had turned back, for he had made up his mind
that that was enough for once. "Oh! I should have liked to see him too,
that I should," said Cinderlad, who was as usual sitting by the chimney
among the cinders. "You, indeed!" said the brothers, "you look as if you
were fit to be among such great lords, nasty beast that you are to sit
there!"

Next day the brothers were for setting out again, and this time too
Cinderlad begged them to let him go with them and see who rode; but no,
they said he was not fit to do that, for he was much too ugly and dirty.
"Well, well, then I will go all alone by myself," said Cinderlad. So the
brothers went to the glass hill, and all the princes and knights began
to ride again, and this time they had taken care to roughen the shoes of
their horses; but that did not help them: they rode and they slipped as
they had done the day before, and not one of them could get even so far
as a yard up the hill. When they had tired out their horses, so that
they could do no more, they again had to stop altogether. But just as
the King was thinking that it would be well to proclaim that the riding
should take place next day for the last time, so that they might have
one more chance, he suddenly bethought himself that it would be well to
wait a little longer to see if the knight in copper armor would come on
this day too. But nothing was to be seen of him. Just as they were still
looking for him, however, came a knight riding on a steed that was much,
much finer than that which the knight in copper armor had ridden, and
this knight had silver armor and a silver saddle and bridle, and all
were so bright that they shone and glistened when he was a long way off.
Again the other knights called to him, and said that he might just as
well give up the attempt to ride up the glass hill, for it was useless
to try; but the knight paid no heed to that, but rode straight away
to the glass hill, and went still farther up than the knight in copper
armor had gone; but when he had ridden two-thirds of the way up he
turned his horse around, and rode down again. The Princess liked this
knight still better than she had liked the other, and sat longing that
he might be able to get up above, and when she saw him turning back she
threw the second apple after him, and it rolled into his shoe, and as
soon as he had got down the glass hill he rode away so fast that no one
could see what had become of him.

In the evening, when everyone was to appear before the King and
Princess, in order that he who had the golden apple might show it, one
knight went in after the other, but none of them had a golden apple to
show.

At night the two brothers went home as they had done the night before,
and told how things had gone, and how everyone had ridden, but no one
had been able to get up the hill. "But last of all," they said, "came
one in silver armor, and he had a silver bridle on his horse, and a
silver saddle, and oh, but he could ride! He took his horse two-thirds
of the way up the hill, but then he turned back. He was a fine fellow,"
said the brothers, "and the Princess threw the second golden apple to
him!"

"Oh, how I should have liked to see him too!" said Cinderlad.

"Oh, indeed! He was a little brighter than the ashes that you sit
grubbing among, you dirty black creature!" said the brothers.

On the third day everything went just as on the former days. Cinderlad
wanted to go with them to look at the riding, but the two brothers would
not have him in their company, and when they got to the glass hill there
was no one who could ride even so far as a yard up it, and everyone
waited for the knight in silver armor, but he was neither to be seen nor
heard of. At last, after a long time, came a knight riding upon a horse
that was such a fine one, its equal had never yet been seen. The knight
had golden armor, and the horse a golden saddle and bridle, and these
were all so bright that they shone and dazzled everyone, even while the
knight was still at a great distance. The other princes and knights were
not able even to call to tell him how useless it was to try to ascend
the hill, so amazed were they at sight of his magnificence. He rode
straight away to the glass hill, and galloped up it as if it were no
hill at all, so that the Princess had not even time to wish that he
might get up the whole way. As soon as he had ridden to the top, he took
the third golden apple from the lap of the Princess and then turned his
horse about and rode down again, and vanished from their sight before
anyone was able to say a word to him.

When the two brothers came home again at night they had much to tell of
how the riding had gone off that day, and at last they told about the
knight in the golden armor too. "He was a fine fellow, that was! Such
another splendid knight is not to be found on earth!" said the brothers.

"Oh, how I should have liked to see him too!" said Cinderlad.

"Well, he shone nearly as brightly as the coal-heaps that thou art
always lying raking among, dirty black creature that thou art!" said the
brothers.

Next day all the knights and princes were to appear before the King and
Princess--it had been too late for them to do it the night before--in
order that he who had the golden apple might produce it. They all went
in turn, first princes, and then knights, but none of them had a golden
apple.

"But somebody must have it," said the King, "for with our own eyes we
all saw a man ride up and take it." So he commanded that everyone in the
kingdom should come to the palace, and see if he could show the apple.
And one after the other they all came, but no one had the golden apple,
and after a long, long time Cinderlad's two brothers came likewise. They
were the last of all, so the King inquired of them if there was no one
else in the kingdom left to come.

"Oh! yes, we have a brother," said the two, "but he never got the golden
apple! He never left the cinder-heap on any of the three days."

"Never mind that," said the King; "as everyone else has come to the
palace, let him come too."

So Cinderlad was forced to go to the King's palace.

"Hast thou the golden apple?" asked the King.

"Yes, here is the first, and here is the second, and here is the third,
too," said Cinderlad, and he took all three apples out of his pocket,
and with that drew off his sooty rags, and appeared there before them in
his bright golden armor, which gleamed as he stood.

"Thou shalt have my daughter, and the half of my kingdom, and thou hast
well earned both!" said the King. So there was a wedding, and Cinderlad
got the King's daughter, and everyone made merry at the wedding, for all
of them could make merry, though they could not ride up the glass hill,
and if they have not left off their merry-making they must be at it
still.(1)


(1) Asbjornsen and Moe.




THE STORY OF PRINCE AHMED AND THE FAIRY PARIBANOU


There was a sultan, who had three sons and a niece. The eldest of the
Princes was called Houssain, the second Ali, the youngest Ahmed, and the
Princess, his niece, Nouronnihar.

The Princess Nouronnihar was the daughter of the younger brother of the
Sultan, who died, and left the Princess very young. The Sultan took upon
himself the care of his daughter's education, and brought her up in his
palace with the three Princes, proposing to marry her when she arrived
at a proper age, and to contract an alliance with some neighboring
prince by that means. But when he perceived that the three Princes, his
sons, loved her passionately, he thought more seriously on that affair.
He was very much concerned; the difficulty he foresaw was to make them
agree, and that the two youngest should consent to yield her up to their
elder brother. As he found them positively obstinate, he sent for them
all together, and said to them: "Children, since for your good and
quiet I have not been able to persuade you no longer to aspire to
the Princess, your cousin, I think it would not be amiss if every one
traveled separately into different countries, so that you might not
meet each other. And, as you know I am very curious, and delight in
everything that's singular, I promise my niece in marriage to him that
shall bring me the most extraordinary rarity; and for the purchase of
the rarity you shall go in search after, and the expense of traveling, I
will give you every one a sum of money."

As the three Princes were always submissive and obedient to the Sultan's
will, and each flattered himself fortune might prove favorable to him,
they all consented to it. The Sultan paid them the money he promised
them; and that very day they gave orders for the preparations for their
travels, and took their leave of the Sultan, that they might be the more
ready to go the next morning. Accordingly they all set out at the same
gate of the city, each dressed like a merchant, attended by an officer
of confidence dressed like a slave, and all well mounted and equipped.
They went the first day's journey together, and lay all at an inn, where
the road was divided into three different tracts. At night, when they
were at supper together, they all agreed to travel for a year, and to
meet at that inn; and that the first that came should wait for the rest;
that, as they had all three taken their leave together of the Sultan,
they might all return together. The next morning by break of day, after
they had embraced and wished each other good success, they mounted their
horses and took each a different road.

Prince Houssain, the eldest brother, arrived at Bisnagar, the capital
of the kingdom of that name, and the residence of its king. He went and
lodged at a khan appointed for foreign merchants; and, having learned
that there were four principal divisions where merchants of all sorts
sold their commodities, and kept shops, and in the midst of which
stood the castle, or rather the King's palace, he went to one of these
divisions the next day.

Prince Houssain could not view this division without admiration. It was
large, and divided into several streets, all vaulted and shaded from the
sun, and yet very light too. The shops were all of a size, and all
that dealt in the same sort of goods lived in one street; as also the
handicrafts-men, who kept their shops in the smaller streets.

The multitude of shops, stocked with all sorts of merchandise, as the
finest linens from several parts of India, some painted in the most
lively colors, and representing beasts, trees, and flowers; silks and
brocades from Persia, China, and other places, porcelain both from Japan
and China, and tapestries, surprised him so much that he knew not how to
believe his own eyes; but when he came to the goldsmiths and jewelers he
was in a kind of ecstacy to behold such prodigious quantities of wrought
gold and silver, and was dazzled by the lustre of the pearls, diamonds,
rubies, emeralds, and other jewels exposed to sale.

Another thing Prince Houssain particularly admired was the great number
of rose-sellers who crowded the streets; for the Indians are so great
lovers of that flower that no one will stir without a nosegay in his
hand or a garland on his head; and the merchants keep them in pots in
their shops, that the air is perfectly perfumed.

After Prince Houssain had run through that division, street by street,
his thoughts fully employed on the riches he had seen, he was very much
tired, which a merchant perceiving, civilly invited him to sit down in
his shop, and he accepted; but had not been sat down long before he
saw a crier pass by with a piece of tapestry on his arm, about six feet
square, and cried at thirty purses. The Prince called to the crier,
and asked to see the tapestry, which seemed to him to be valued at an
exorbitant price, not only for the size of it, but the meanness of the
stuff; when he had examined it well, he told the crier that he could
not comprehend how so small a piece of tapestry, and of so indifferent
appearance, could be set at so high a price.

The crier, who took him for a merchant, replied: "If this price seems
so extravagant to you, your amazement will be greater when I tell you I
have orders to raise it to forty purses, and not to part with it under."
"Certainly," answered Prince Houssain, "it must have something very
extraordinary in it, which I know nothing of." "You have guessed it,
sir," replied the crier, "and will own it when you come to know that
whoever sits on this piece of tapestry may be transported in an instant
wherever he desires to be, without being stopped by any obstacle."

At this discourse of the crier the Prince of the Indies, considering
that the principal motive of his travel was to carry the Sultan, his
father, home some singular rarity, thought that he could not meet with
any which could give him more satisfaction. "If the tapestry," said he
to the crier, "has the virtue you assign it, I shall not think forty
purses too much, but shall make you a present besides." "Sir," replied
the crier, "I have told you the truth; and it is an easy matter to
convince you of it, as soon as you have made the bargain for forty
purses, on condition I show you the experiment. But, as I suppose you
have not so much about you, and to receive them I must go with you to
your khan, where you lodge, with the leave of the master of the shop, we
will go into the back shop, and I will spread the tapestry; and when we
have both sat down, and you have formed the wish to be transported into
your apartment of the khan, if we are not transported thither it shall
be no bargain, and you shall be at your liberty. As to your present,
though I am paid for my trouble by the seller, I shall receive it as a
favor, and be very much obliged to you, and thankful."

On the credit of the crier, the Prince accepted the conditions, and
concluded the bargain; and, having got the master's leave, they went
into his back shop; they both sat down on it, and as soon as the Prince
formed his wish to be transported into his apartment at the khan he
presently found himself and the crier there; and, as he wanted not a
more sufficient proof of the virtue of the tapestry, he counted the
crier out forty pieces of gold, and gave him twenty pieces for himself.

In this manner Prince Houssain became the possessor of the tapestry,
and was overjoyed that at his arrival at Bisnagar he had found so rare
a piece, which he never disputed would gain him the hand of Nouronnihar.
In short, he looked upon it as an impossible thing for the Princes his
younger brothers to meet with anything to be compared with it. It was
in his power, by sitting on his tapestry, to be at the place of meeting
that very day; but, as he was obliged to stay there for his brothers, as
they had agreed, and as he was curious to see the King of Bisnagar and
his Court, and to inform himself of the strength, laws, customs, and
religion of the kingdom, he chose to make a longer abode there, and to
spend some months in satisfying his curiosity.

Prince Houssain might have made a longer abode in the kingdom and
Court of Bisnagar, but he was so eager to be nearer the Princess that,
spreading the tapestry, he and the officer he had brought with him sat
down, and as soon as he had formed his wish were transported to the inn
at which he and his brothers were to meet, and where he passed for a
merchant till they came.

Prince Ali, Prince Houssain's second brother, who designed to travel
into Persia, took the road, having three days after he parted with
his brothers joined a caravan, and after four days' travel arrived at
Schiraz, which was the capital of the kingdom of Persia. Here he passed
for a jeweler.

The next morning Prince Ali, who traveled only for his pleasure, and
had brought nothing but just necessaries along with him, after he had
dressed himself, took a walk into that part of the town which they at
Schiraz called the bezestein.

Among all the criers who passed backward and forward with several sorts
of goods, offering to sell them, he was not a little surprised to see
one who held an ivory telescope in his hand of about a foot in length
and the thickness of a man's thumb, and cried it at thirty purses. At
first he thought the crier mad, and to inform himself went to a shop,
and said to the merchant, who stood at the door: "Pray, sir, is not that
man" (pointing to the crier who cried the ivory perspective glass at
thirty purses) "mad? If he is not, I am very much deceived."

"Indeed, sir," answered the merchant, "he was in his right senses
yesterday; I can assure you he is one of the ablest criers we have, and
the most employed of any when anything valuable is to be sold. And if he
cries the ivory perspective glass at thirty purses it must be worth as
much or more, on some account or other. He will come by presently, and
we will call him, and you shall be satisfied; in the meantime sit down
on my sofa, and rest yourself."

Prince Ali accepted the merchant's obliging offer, and presently
afterward the crier passed by. The merchant called him by his name, and,
pointing to the Prince, said to him: "Tell that gentleman, who asked
me if you were in your right senses, what you mean by crying that ivory
perspective glass, which seems not to be worth much, at thirty purses.
I should be very much amazed myself if I did not know you." The crier,
addressing himself to Prince Ali, said: "Sir, you are not the only
person that takes me for a madman on account of this perspective glass.
You shall judge yourself whether I am or no, when I have told you its
property and I hope you will value it at as high a price as those I have
showed it to already, who had as bad an opinion of me as you.

"First, sir," pursued the crier, presenting the ivory pipe to the
Prince, "observe that this pipe is furnished with a glass at both ends;
and consider that by looking through one of them you see whatever object
you wish to behold." "I am," said the Prince, "ready to make you all
imaginable reparation for the scandal I have thrown on you if you will
make the truth of what you advance appear," and as he had the ivory pipe
in his hand, after he had looked at the two glasses he said: "Show me
at which of these ends I must look that I may be satisfied." The crier
presently showed him, and he looked through, wishing at the same time to
see the Sultan his father, whom he immediately beheld in perfect health,
set on his throne, in the midst of his council. Afterward, as there was
nothing in the world so dear to him, after the Sultan, as the Princess
Nouronnihar, he wished to see her; and saw her at her toilet laughing,
and in a pleasant humor, with her women about her.

Prince Ali wanted no other proof to be persuaded that this perspective
glass was the most valuable thing in the world, and believed that if
he should neglect to purchase it he should never meet again with such
another rarity. He therefore took the crier with him to the khan where
he lodged, and counted him out the money, and received the perspective
glass.

Prince Ali was overjoyed at his bargain, and persuaded himself that,
as his brothers would not be able to meet with anything so rare and
admirable, the Princess Nouronnihar would be the recompense of his
fatigue and trouble; that he thought of nothing but visiting the Court
of Persia incognito, and seeing whatever was curious in Schiraz and
thereabouts, till the caravan with which he came returned back to the
Indies. As soon as the caravan was ready to set out, the Prince joined
them, and arrived happily without any accident or trouble, otherwise
than the length of the journey and fatigue of traveling, at the place of
rendezvous, where he found Prince Houssain, and both waited for Prince
Ahmed.

Prince Ahmed, who took the road of Samarcand, the next day after his
arrival there went, as his brothers had done, into the bezestein, where
he had not walked long but heard a crier, who had an artificial apple
in his hand, cry it at five and thirty purses; upon which he stopped the
crier, and said to him: "Let me see that apple, and tell me what virtue
and extraordinary properties it has, to be valued at so high a rate."
"Sir," said the crier, giving it into his hand, "if you look at the
outside of this apple, it is very worthless, but if you consider its
properties, virtues, and the great use and benefit it is to mankind, you
will say it is no price for it, and that he who possesses it is master
of a great treasure. In short, it cures all sick persons of the most
mortal diseases; and if the patient is dying it will recover him
immediately and restore him to perfect health; and this is done after
the easiest manner in the world, which is by the patient's smelling the
apple."

"If I may believe you," replied Prince Ahmed, "the virtues of this apple
are wonderful, and it is invaluable; but what ground have I, for all you
tell me, to be persuaded of the truth of this matter?" "Sir," replied
the crier, "the thing is known and averred by the whole city of
Samarcand; but, without going any further, ask all these merchants you
see here, and hear what they say. You will find several of them will
tell you they had not been alive this day if they had not made use of
this excellent remedy. And, that you may better comprehend what it is,
I must tell you it is the fruit of the study and experiments of a
celebrated philosopher of this city, who applied himself all his
lifetime to the study and knowledge of the virtues of plants and
minerals, and at last attained to this composition, by which he
performed such surprising cures in this town as will never be forgot,
but died suddenly himself, before he could apply his sovereign remedy,
and left his wife and a great many young children behind him, in very
indifferent circumstances, who, to support her family and provide for
her children, is resolved to sell it."

While the crier informed Prince Ahmed of the virtues of the artificial
apple, a great many persons came about them and confirmed what he said;
and one among the rest said he had a friend dangerously ill, whose life
was despaired of; and that was a favorable opportunity to show Prince
Ahmed the experiment. Upon which Prince Ahmed told the crier he would
give him forty purses if he cured the sick person.

The crier, who had orders to sell it at that price, said to Prince
Ahmed: "Come, sir, let us go and make the experiment, and the apple
shall be yours; and I can assure you that it will always have the
desired effect." In short, the experiment succeeded, and the Prince,
after he had counted out to the crier forty purses, and he had delivered
the apple to him, waited patiently for the first caravan that should
return to the Indies, and arrived in perfect health at the inn where the
Princes Houssain and Ali waited for him.

When the Princes met they showed each other their treasures, and
immediately saw through the glass that the Princess was dying. They then
sat down on the carpet, wished themselves with her, and were there in a
moment.

Prince Ahmed no sooner perceived himself in Nouronnihar's chamber than
he rose off the tapestry, as did also the other two Princes, and went
to the bedside, and put the apple under her nose; some moments after the
Princess opened her eyes, and turned her head from one side to another,
looking at the persons who stood about her; and then rose up in the bed,
and asked to be dressed, just as if she had waked out of a sound sleep.
Her women having presently informed her, in a manner that showed their
joy, that she was obliged to the three Princes for the sudden recovery
of her health, and particularly to Prince Ahmed, she immediately
expressed her joy to see them, and thanked them all together, and
afterward Prince Ahmed in particular.

While the Princess was dressing the Princes went to throw themselves at
the Sultan their father's feet, and pay their respects to him. But when
they came before him they found he had been informed of their arrival by
the chief of the Princess's eunuchs, and by what means the Princess had
been perfectly cured. The Sultan received and embraced them with the
greatest joy, both for their return and the recovery of the Princess his
niece, whom he loved as well as if she had been his own daughter, and
who had been given over by the physicians. After the usual ceremonies
and compliments the Princes presented each his rarity: Prince Houssain
his tapestry, which he had taken care not to leave behind him in the
Princess's chamber; Prince Ali his ivory perspective glass, and Prince
Ahmed his artificial apple; and after each had commended their present,
when they put it into the Sultan's hands, they begged of him to
pronounce their fate, and declare to which of them he would give the
Princess Nouronnihar for a wife, according to his promise.

The Sultan of the Indies, having heard, without interrupting them, all
that the Princes could represent further about their rarities, and
being well informed of what had happened in relation to the Princess
Nouronnihar's cure, remained some time silent, as if he were thinking
on what answer he should make. At last he broke the silence, and said
to them: "I would declare for one of you children with a great deal of
pleasure if I could do it with justice; but consider whether I can do it
or no. 'Tis true, Prince Ahmed, the Princess my niece is obliged to
your artificial apple for her cure; but I must ask you whether or no
you could have been so serviceable to her if you had not known by Prince
Ali's perspective glass the danger she was in, and if Prince Houssain's
tapestry had not brought you so soon. Your perspective glass, Prince
Ali, informed you and your brothers that you were like to lose the
Princess your cousin, and there you must own a great obligation.

"You must also grant that that knowledge would have been of no service
without the artificial apple and the tapestry. And lastly, Prince
Houssain, the Princess would be very ungrateful if she should not
show her acknowledgment of the service of your tapestry, which was so
necessary a means toward her cure. But consider, it would have been of
little use if you had not been acquainted with the Princess's illness
by Prince Ali's glass, and Prince Ahmed had not applied his artificial
apple. Therefore, as neither tapestry, ivory perspective glass, nor
artificial apple have the least preference one before the other, but, on
the contrary, there's a perfect equality, I cannot grant the Princess to
any one of you; and the only fruit you have reaped from your travels is
the glory of having equally contributed to restore her health.

"If all this be true," added the Sultan, "you see that I must have
recourse to other means to determine certainly in the choice I ought
to make among you; and that, as there is time enough between this and
night, I'll do it to-day. Go and get each of you a bow and arrow, and
repair to the great plain, where they exercise horses. I'll soon come to
you, and declare I will give the Princess Nouronnihar to him that shoots
the farthest."

The three Princes had nothing to say against the decision of the Sultan.
When they were out of his presence they each provided themselves with a
bow and arrow, which they delivered to one of their officers, and went
to the plain appointed, followed by a great concourse of people.

The Sultan did not make them wait long for him, and as soon as he
arrived Prince Houssain, as the eldest, took his bow and arrow and shot
first; Prince Ali shot next, and much beyond him; and Prince Ahmed last
of all, but it so happened that nobody could see where his arrow fell;
and, notwithstanding all the diligence that was used by himself and
everybody else, it was not to be found far or near. And though it was
believed that he shot the farthest, and that he therefore deserved the
Princess Nouronnihar, it was, however, necessary that his arrow
should be found to make the matter more evident and certain; and,
notwithstanding his remonstrance, the Sultan judged in favor of Prince
Ali, and gave orders for preparations to be made for the wedding, which
was celebrated a few days after with great magnificence.

Prince Houssain would not honor the feast with his presence. In short,
his grief was so violent and insupportable that he left the Court, and
renounced all right of succession to the crown, to turn hermit.

Prince Ahmed, too, did not come to Prince Ali's and the Princess
Nouronnihar's wedding any more than his brother Houssain, but did not
renounce the world as he had done. But, as he could not imagine what had
become of his arrow, he stole away from his attendants and resolved to
search after it, that he might not have anything to reproach himself
with. With this intent he went to the place where the Princes Houssain's
and Ali's were gathered up, and, going straight forward from there,
looking carefully on both sides of him, he went so far that at last
he began to think his labor was all in vain; but yet he could not help
going forward till he came to some steep craggy rocks, which were
bounds to his journey, and were situated in a barren country, about four
leagues distant from where he set out.


II


When Prince Ahmed came pretty nigh to these rocks he perceived an arrow,
which he gathered up, looked earnestly at it, and was in the greatest
astonishment to find it was the same he shot away. "Certainly," said he
to himself, "neither I nor any man living could shoot an arrow so far,"
and, finding it laid flat, not sticking into the ground, he judged that
it rebounded against the rock. "There must be some mystery in this,"
said he to himself again, "and it may be advantageous to me. Perhaps
fortune, to make me amends for depriving me of what I thought the
greatest happiness, may have reserved a greater blessing for my
comfort."

As these rocks were full of caves and some of those caves were deep, the
Prince entered into one, and, looking about, cast his eyes on an iron
door, which seemed to have no lock, but he feared it was fastened.
However, thrusting against it, it opened, and discovered an easy
descent, but no steps, which he walked down with his arrow in his
hand. At first he thought he was going into a dark, obscure place, but
presently a quite different light succeeded that which he came out of,
and, entering into a large, spacious place, at about fifty or sixty
paces distant, he perceived a magnificent palace, which he had not then
time enough to look at. At the same time a lady of majestic port and air
advanced as far as the porch, attended by a large troop of ladies, so
finely dressed and beautiful that it was difficult to distinguish which
was the mistress.

As soon as Prince Ahmed perceived the lady, he made all imaginable
haste to go and pay his respects; and the lady, on her part, seeing him
coming, prevented him from addressing his discourse to her first, but
said to him: "Come nearer, Prince Ahmed, you are welcome."

It was no small surprise to the Prince to hear himself named in a place
he had never heard of, though so nigh to his father's capital, and he
could not comprehend how he should be known to a lady who was a stranger
to him. At last he returned the lady's compliment by throwing himself at
her feet, and, rising up again, said to her:

"Madam, I return you a thousand thanks for the assurance you give me of
a welcome to a place where I believed my imprudent curiosity had made
me penetrate too far. But, madam, may I, without being guilty of ill
manners, dare to ask you by what adventure you know me? and how you, who
live in the same neighborhood with me, should be so great a stranger to
me?"

"Prince," said the lady, "let us go into the hall, there I will gratify
you in your request."

After these words the lady led Prince Ahmed into the hall. Then she sat
down on a sofa, and when the Prince by her entreaty had done the same
she said: "You are surprised, you say, that I should know you and not be
known by you, but you will be no longer surprised when I inform you who
I am. You are undoubtedly sensible that your religion teaches you to
believe that the world is inhabited by genies as well as men. I am the
daughter of one of the most powerful and distinguished genies, and my
name is Paribanou. The only thing that I have to add is, that you seemed
to me worthy of a more happy fate than that of possessing the Princess
Nouronnihar; and, that you might attain to it, I was present when you
drew your arrow, and foresaw it would not go beyond Prince Houssain's.
I took it in the air, and gave it the necessary motion to strike against
the rocks near which you found it, and I tell you that it lies in your
power to make use of the favorable opportunity which presents itself to
make you happy."

As the Fairy Paribanou pronounced these last words with a different
tone, and looked, at the same time, tenderly upon Prince Ahmed, with
a modest blush on her cheeks, it was no hard matter for the Prince to
comprehend what happiness she meant. He presently considered that the
Princess Nouronnihar could never be his and that the Fairy Paribanou
excelled her infinitely in beauty, agreeableness, wit, and, as much
as he could conjecture by the magnificence of the palace, in immense
riches. He blessed the moment that he thought of seeking after his arrow
a second time, and, yielding to his love, "Madam," replied he, "should
I all my life have the happiness of being your slave, and the admirer
of the many charms which ravish my soul, I should think myself the most
blessed of men. Pardon in me the boldness which inspires me to ask this
favor, and don't refuse to admit me into your Court, a prince who is
entirely devoted to you."

"Prince," answered the Fairy, "will you not pledge your faith to me,
as well as I give mine to you?" "Yes, madam," replied the Prince, in an
ecstacy of joy; "what can I do better, and with greater pleasure?
Yes, my sultaness, my queen, I'll give you my heart without the least
reserve." "Then," answered the Fairy, "you are my husband, and I am
your wife. But, as I suppose," pursued she, "that you have eaten nothing
to-day, a slight repast shall be served up for you, while preparations
are making for our wedding feast at night, and then I will show you the
apartments of my palace, and you shall judge if this hall is not the
meanest part of it."

Some of the Fairy's women, who came into the hall with them, and guessed
her intentions, went immediately out, and returned presently with some
excellent meats and wines.

When Prince Ahmed had ate and drunk as much as he cared for, the Fairy
Paribanou carried him through all the apartments, where he saw diamonds,
rubies, emeralds and all sorts of fine jewels, intermixed with pearls,
agate, jasper, porphyry, and all sorts of the most precious marbles.
But, not to mention the richness of the furniture, which was
inestimable, there was such a profuseness throughout that the Prince,
instead of ever having seen anything like it, owned that he could not
have imagined that there was anything in the world that could come up to
it. "Prince," said the Fairy, "if you admire my palace so much, which,
indeed, is very beautiful, what would you say to the palaces of the
chief of our genies, which are much more beautiful, spacious, and
magnificent? I could also charm you with my gardens, but we will let
that alone till another time. Night draws near, and it will be time to
go to supper."

The next hall which the Fairy led the Prince into, and where the cloth
was laid for the feast, was the last apartment the Prince had not seen,
and not in the least inferior to the others. At his entrance into it
he admired the infinite number of sconces of wax candles perfumed with
amber, the multitude of which, instead of being confused, were placed
with so just a symmetry as formed an agreeable and pleasant sight. A
large side table was set out with all sorts of gold plate, so finely
wrought that the workmanship was much more valuable than the weight of
the gold. Several choruses of beautiful women richly dressed, and whose
voices were ravishing, began a concert, accompanied with all sorts of
the most harmonious instruments; and when they were set down at table
the Fairy Paribanou took care to help Prince Ahmed to the most delicate
meats, which she named as she invited him to eat of them, and which
the Prince found to be so exquisitely nice that he commended them with
exaggeration, and said that the entertainment far surpassed those of
man. He found also the same excellence in the wines, which neither he
nor the Fairy tasted of till the dessert was served up, which consisted
of the choicest sweetmeats and fruits.

The wedding feast was continued the next day, or, rather, the days
following the celebration were a continual feast.

At the end of six months Prince Ahmed, who always loved and honored the
Sultan his father, conceived a great desire to know how he was, and
that desire could not be satisfied without his going to see; he told the
Fairy of it, and desired she would give him leave.

"Prince," said she, "go when you please. But first, don't take it amiss
that I give you some advice how you shall behave yourself where you are
going. First, I don't think it proper for you to tell the Sultan your
father of our marriage, nor of my quality, nor the place where you have
been. Beg of him to be satisfied in knowing you are happy, and desire
no more; and let him know that the sole end of your visit is to make him
easy, and inform him of your fate."

She appointed twenty gentlemen, well mounted and equipped, to attend
him. When all was ready Prince Ahmed took his leave of the Fairy,
embraced her, and renewed his promise to return soon. Then his horse,
which was most finely caparisoned, and was as beautiful a creature as
any in the Sultan of Indies' stables, was led to him, and he mounted him
with an extraordinary grace; and, after he had bid her a last adieu, set
forward on his journey.

As it was not a great way to his father's capital, Prince Ahmed soon
arrived there. The people, glad to see him again, received him with
acclamations of joy, and followed him in crowds to the Sultan's
apartment. The Sultan received and embraced him with great joy,
complaining at the same time, with a fatherly tenderness, of the
affliction his long absence had been to him, which he said was the more
grievous for that, fortune having decided in favor of Prince Ali his
brother, he was afraid he might have committed some rash action.

The Prince told a story of his adventures without speaking of the Fairy,
whom he said that he must not mention, and ended: "The only favor I
ask of your Majesty is to give me leave to come often and pay you my
respects, and to know how you do."

"Son," answered the Sultan of the Indies, "I cannot refuse you the leave
you ask me; but I should much rather you would resolve to stay with me;
at least tell me where I may send to you if you should fail to come, or
when I may think your presence necessary." "Sir," replied Prince Ahmed,
"what your Majesty asks of me is part of the mystery I spoke to your
Majesty of. I beg of you to give me leave to remain silent on this head,
for I shall come so frequently that I am afraid that I shall sooner be
thought troublesome than be accused of negligence in my duty."

The Sultan of the Indies pressed Prince Ahmed no more, but said to him:
"Son, I penetrate no farther into your secrets, but leave you at your
liberty; but can tell you that you could not do me a greater pleasure
than to come, and by your presence restore to me the joy I have not
felt this long time, and that you shall always be welcome when you come,
without interrupting your business or pleasure."

Prince Ahmed stayed but three days at the Sultan his father's Court, and
the fourth returned to the Fairy Paribanou, who did not expect him so
soon.

A month after Prince Ahmed's return from paying a visit to his father,
as the Fairy Paribanou had observed that the Prince, since the time that
he gave her an account of his journey, his discourse with his father,
and the leave he asked to go and see him often, had never talked of the
Sultan, as if there had been no such person in the world, whereas before
he was always speaking of him, she thought he forebore on her account;
therefore she took an opportunity to say to him one day: "Prince, tell
me, have you forgot the Sultan your father? Don't you remember the
promise you made to go and see him often? For my part I have not forgot
what you told me at your return, and so put you in mind of it, that you
may not be long before you acquit yourself of your promise."

So Prince Ahmed went the next morning with the same attendance as
before, but much finer, and himself more magnificently mounted,
equipped, and dressed, and was received by the Sultan with the same
joy and satisfaction. For several months he constantly paid his visits,
always in a richer and finer equipage.

At last some viziers, the Sultan's favorites, who judged of Prince
Ahmed's grandeur and power by the figure he cut, made the Sultan jealous
of his son, saying it was to be feared he might inveigle himself into
the people's favor and dethrone him.

The Sultan of the Indies was so far from thinking that Prince Ahmed
could be capable of so pernicious a design as his favorites would make
him believe that he said to them: "You are mistaken; my son loves me,
and I am certain of his tenderness and fidelity, as I have given him no
reason to be disgusted."

But the favorites went on abusing Prince Ahmed till the Sultan said: "Be
it as it will, I don't believe my son Ahmed is so wicked as you would
persuade me he is; how ever, I am obliged to you for your good advice,
and don't dispute but that it proceeds from your good intentions."

The Sultan of the Indies said this that his favorites might not know the
impressions their discourse had made on his mind; which had so alarmed
him that he resolved to have Prince Ahmed watched unknown to his grand
vizier. So he sent for a female magician, who was introduced by a back
door into his apartment. "Go immediately," he said, "and follow my son,
and watch him so well as to find out where he retires, and bring me
word."

The magician left the Sultan, and, knowing the place where Prince Ahmed
found his arrow, went immediately thither, and hid herself near the
rocks, so that nobody could see her.

The next morning Prince Ahmed set out by daybreak, without taking leave
either of the Sultan or any of his Court, according to custom. The
magician, seeing him coming, followed him with her eyes, till on a
sudden she lost sight of him and his attendants.

As the rocks were very steep and craggy, they were an insurmountable
barrier, so that the magician judged that there were but two things
for it: either that the Prince retired into some cavern, or an abode of
genies or fairies. Thereupon she came out of the place where she was hid
and went directly to the hollow way, which she traced till she came
to the farther end, looking carefully about on all sides; but,
notwithstanding all her diligence, could perceive no opening, not so
much as the iron gate which Prince Ahmed discovered, which was to be
seen and opened to none but men, and only to such whose presence was
agreeable to the Fairy Paribanou.

The magician, who saw it was in vain for her to search any farther, was
obliged to be satisfied with the discovery she had made, and returned to
give the Sultan an account.

The Sultan was very well pleased with the magician's conduct, and said
to her: "Do you as you think fit; I'll wait patiently the event of your
promises," and to encourage her made her a present of a diamond of great
value.

As Prince Ahmed had obtained the Fairy Paribanou's leave to go to the
Sultan of the Indies' Court once a month, he never failed, and the
magician, knowing the time, went a day or two before to the foot of the
rock where she lost sight of the Prince and his attendants, and waited
there.

The next morning Prince Ahmed went out, as usual, at the iron gate, with
the same attendants as before, and passed by the magician, whom he knew
not to be such, and, seeing her lie with her head against the rock,
and complaining as if she were in great pain, he pitied her, turned his
horse about, went to her, and asked her what was the matter with her,
and what he could do to ease her.

The artful sorceress looked at the Prince in a pitiful manner, without
ever lifting up her head, and answered in broken words and sighs, as
if she could hardly fetch her breath, that she was going to the capital
city, but on the way thither she was taken with so violent a fever that
her strength failed her, and she was forced to lie down where he saw
her, far from any habitation, and without any hopes of assistance.

"Good woman," replied Prince Ahmed, "you are not so far from help as you
imagine. I am ready to assist you, and convey you where you will meet
with a speedy cure; only get up, and let one of my people take you
behind him."

At these words the magician, who pretended sickness only to know where
the Prince lived and what he did, refused not the charitable offer he
made her, and that her actions might correspond with her words she made
many pretended vain endeavors to get up. At the same time two of the
Prince's attendants, alighting off their horses, helped her up, and set
her behind another, and mounted their horses again, and followed the
Prince, who turned back to the iron gate, which was opened by one of his
retinue who rode before. And when he came into the outward court of the
Fairy, without dismounting himself, he sent to tell her he wanted to
speak with her.

The Fairy Paribanou came with all imaginable haste, not knowing what
made Prince Ahmed return so soon, who, not giving her time to ask him
the reason, said: "Princess, I desire you would have compassion on this
good woman," pointing to the magician, who was held up by two of his
retinue. "I found her in the condition you see her in, and promised her
the assistance she stands in need of, and am persuaded that you, out of
your own goodness, as well as upon my entreaty, will not abandon her."

The Fairy Paribanou, who had her eyes fixed upon the pretended sick
woman all the time that the Prince was talking to her, ordered two of
her women who followed her to take her from the two men that held her,
and carry her into an apartment of the palace, and take as much care of
her as she would herself.

While the two women executed the Fairy's commands, she went up to Prince
Ahmed, and, whispering in his ear, said: "Prince, this woman is not so
sick as she pretends to be; and I am very much mistaken if she is not an
impostor, who will be the cause of a great trouble to you. But don't
be concerned, let what will be devised against you; be persuaded that
I will deliver you out of all the snares that shall be laid for you. Go
and pursue your journey."

This discourse of the Fairy's did not in the least frighten Prince
Ahmed. "My Princess," said he, "as I do not remember I ever did or
designed anybody an injury, I cannot believe anybody can have a thought
of doing me one, but if they have I shall not, nevertheless, forbear
doing good whenever I have an opportunity." Then he went back to his
father's palace.

In the meantime the two women carried the magician into a very fine
apartment, richly furnished. First they sat her down upon a sofa, with
her back supported with a cushion of gold brocade, while they made a bed
on the same sofa before her, the quilt of which was finely embroidered
with silk, the sheets of the finest linen, and the coverlet
cloth-of-gold. When they had put her into bed (for the old sorceress
pretended that her fever was so violent she could not help herself in
the least) one of the women went out, and returned soon again with a
china dish in her hand, full of a certain liquor, which she presented to
the magician, while the other helped her to sit up. "Drink this liquor,"
said she; "it is the Water of the Fountain of Lions, and a sovereign
remedy against all fevers whatsoever. You will find the effect of it in
less than an hour's time."

The magician, to dissemble the better, took it after a great deal of
entreaty; but at last she took the china dish, and, holding back her
head, swallowed down the liquor. When she was laid down again the two
women covered her up. "Lie quiet," said she who brought her the china
cup, "and get a little sleep if you can. We'll leave you, and hope to
find you perfectly cured when we come again an hour hence."

The two women came again at the time they said they should, and found
the magician up and dressed, and sitting upon the sofa. "Oh, admirable
potion!" she said: "it has wrought its cure much sooner than you told me
it would, and I shall be able to prosecute my journey."

The two women, who were fairies as well as their mistress, after they
had told the magician how glad they were that she was cured so soon,
walked before her, and conducted her through several apartments, all
more noble than that wherein she lay, into a large hall, the most richly
and magnificently furnished of all the palace.

Fairy Paribanou sat in this hall on a throne of massive gold, enriched
with diamonds, rubies, and pearls of an extraordinary size, and attended
on each hand by a great number of beautiful fairies, all richly clothed.
At the sight of so much majesty, the magician was not only dazzled, but
was so amazed that, after she had prostrated herself before the throne,
she could not open her lips to thank the Fairy as she proposed. However,
Paribanou saved her the trouble, and said to her: "Good woman, I am glad
I had an opportunity to oblige you, and to see you are able to pursue
your journey. I won't detain you, but perhaps you may not be displeased
to see my palace; follow my women, and they will show it you."

Then the magician went back and related to the Sultan of the Indies all
that had happened, and how very rich Prince Ahmed was since his marriage
with the Fairy, richer than all the kings in the world, and how there
was danger that he should come and take the throne from his father.

Though the Sultan of the Indies was very well persuaded that Prince
Ahmed's natural disposition was good, yet he could not help being
concerned at the discourse of the old sorceress, to whom, when she was
taking her leave, he said: "I thank thee for the pains thou hast taken,
and thy wholesome advice. I am so sensible of the great importance it is
to me that I shall deliberate upon it in council."

Now the favorites advised that the Prince should be killed, but the
magician advised differently: "Make him give you all kinds of wonderful
things, by the Fairy's help, till she tires of him and sends him away.
As, for example, every time your Majesty goes into the field, you are
obliged to be at a great expense, not only in pavilions and tents for
your army, but likewise in mules and camels to carry their baggage. Now,
might not you engage him to use his interest with the Fairy to procure
you a tent which might be carried in a man's hand, and which should be
so large as to shelter your whole army against bad weather?"

When the magician had finished her speech, the Sultan asked his
favorites if they had anything better to propose; and, finding them
all silent, determined to follow the magician's advice, as the most
reasonable and most agreeable to his mild government.

Next day the Sultan did as the magician had advised him, and asked for
the pavilion.

Prince Ahmed never expected that the Sultan his father would have
asked such a thing, which at first appeared so difficult, not to say
impossible. Though he knew not absolutely how great the power of genies
and fairies was, he doubted whether it extended so far as to compass
such a tent as his father desired. At last he replied: "Though it is
with the greatest reluctance imaginable, I will not fail to ask the
favor of my wife your Majesty desires, but will not promise you to
obtain it; and if I should not have the honor to come again to pay you
my respects that shall be the sign that I have not had success. But
beforehand, I desire you to forgive me, and consider that you yourself
have reduced me to this extremity."

"Son," replied the Sultan of the Indies, "I should be very sorry if what
I ask of you should cause me the displeasure of never seeing you more. I
find you don't know the power a husband has over a wife; and yours would
show that her love to you was very indifferent if she, with the power
she has of a fairy, should refuse you so trifling a request as this I
desire you to ask of her for my sake." The Prince went back, and was
very sad for fear of offending the Fairy. She kept pressing him to
tell her what was the matter, and at last he said: "Madam, you may have
observed that hitherto I have been content with your love, and have
never asked you any other favor. Consider then, I conjure you, that
it is not I, but the Sultan my father, who indiscreetly, or at least I
think so, begs of you a pavilion large enough to shelter him, his Court,
and army from the violence of the weather, and which a man may carry in
his hand. But remember it is the Sultan my father asks this favor."

"Prince," replied the Fairy, smiling, "I am sorry that so small a matter
should disturb you, and make you so uneasy as you appeared to me."

Then the Fairy sent for her treasurer, to whom, when she came, she said:
"Nourgihan"--which was her name--"bring me the largest pavilion in my
treasury." Nourgiham returned presently with the pavilion, which she
could not only hold in her hand, but in the palm of her hand when she
shut her fingers, and presented it to her mistress, who gave it to
Prince Ahmed to look at.

When Prince Ahmed saw the pavilion which the Fairy called the largest in
her treasury, he fancied she had a mind to jest with him, and thereupon
the marks of his surprise appeared presently in his countenance; which
Paribanou perceiving burst out laughing. "What! Prince," cried she, "do
you think I jest with you? You'll see presently that I am in earnest.
Nourgihan," said she to her treasurer, taking the tent out of Prince
Ahmed's hands, "go and set it up, that the Prince may judge whether it
may be large enough for the Sultan his father."

The treasurer went immediately with it out of the palace, and carried it
a great way off; and when she had set it up one end reached to the very
palace; at which time the Prince, thinking it small, found it large
enough to shelter two greater armies than that of the Sultan his
father's, and then said to Paribanou: "I ask my Princess a thousand
pardons for my incredulity; after what I have seen I believe there
is nothing impossible to you." "You see," said the Fairy, "that the
pavilion is larger than what your father may have occasion for; for
you must know that it has one property--that it is larger or smaller
according to the army it is to cover."

The treasurer took down the tent again, and brought it to the Prince,
who took it, and, without staying any longer than till the next day,
mounted his horse, and went with the same attendants to the Sultan his
father.

The Sultan, who was persuaded that there could not be any such thing
as such a tent as he asked for, was in a great surprise at the Prince's
diligence. He took the tent and after he had admired its smallness his
amazement was so great that he could not recover himself. When the tent
was set up in the great plain, which we have before mentioned, he found
it large enough to shelter an army twice as large as he could bring into
the field.

But the Sultan was not yet satisfied. "Son," said he, "I have already
expressed to you how much I am obliged to you for the present of the
tent you have procured me; that I look upon it as the most valuable
thing in all my treasury. But you must do one thing more for me, which
will be every whit as agreeable to me. I am informed that the Fairy,
your spouse, makes use of a certain water, called the Water of the
Fountain of Lions, which cures all sorts of fevers, even the most
dangerous, and, as I am perfectly well persuaded my health is dear to
you, I don't doubt but you will ask her for a bottle of that water for
me, and bring it me as a sovereign medicine, which I may make use of
when I have occasion. Do me this other important piece of service, and
thereby complete the duty of a good son toward a tender father."

The Prince returned and told the Fairy what his father had said;
"There's a great deal of wickedness in this demand?" she answered, "as
you will understand by what I am going to tell you. The Fountain of
Lions is situated in the middle of a court of a great castle, the
entrance into which is guarded by four fierce lions, two of which sleep
alternately, while the other two are awake. But don't let that frighten
you: I'll give you means to pass by them without any danger."

The Fairy Paribanou was at that time very hard at work, and, as she had
several clews of thread by her, she took up one, and, presenting it
to Prince Ahmed, said: "First take this clew of thread. I'll tell you
presently the use of it. In the second place, you must have two horses;
one you must ride yourself, and the other you must lead, which must be
loaded with a sheep cut into four quarters, that must be killed to-day.
In the third place, you must be provided with a bottle, which I will
give you, to bring the water in. Set out early to-morrow morning, and
when you have passed the iron gate throw the clew of thread before you,
which will roll till it comes to the gates of the castle. Follow it, and
when it stops, as the gates will be open, you will see the four lions:
the two that are awake will, by their roaring, wake the other two, but
don't be frightened, but throw each of them a quarter of mutton, and
then clap spurs to your horse and ride to the fountain; fill your bottle
without alighting, and then return with the same expedition. The lions
will be so busy eating they will let you pass by them."

Prince Ahmed set out the next morning at the time appointed by the
Fairy, and followed her directions exactly. When he arrived at the
gates of the castle he distributed the quarters of mutton among the
four lions, and, passing through the midst of them bravely, got to the
fountain, filled his bottle, and returned back as safe and sound as he
went. When he had gone a little distance from the castle gates he turned
him about, and, perceiving two of the lions coming after him, he drew
his sabre and prepared himself for defense. But as he went forward he
saw one of them turned out of the road at some distance, and showed by
his head and tail that he did not come to do him any harm, but only to
go before him, and that the other stayed behind to follow, he put his
sword up again in its scabbard. Guarded in this manner, he arrived at
the capital of the Indies, but the lions never left him till they had
conducted him to the gates of the Sultan's palace; after which they
returned the same way they came, though not without frightening all
that saw them, for all they went in a very gentle manner and showed no
fierceness.

A great many officers came to attend the Prince while he dismounted his
horse, and afterward conducted him into the Sultan's apartment, who was
at that time surrounded with his favorites. He approached toward the
throne, laid the bottle at the Sultan's feet, and kissed the rich
tapestry which covered his footstool, and then said:

"I have brought you, sir, the healthful water which your Majesty desired
so much to keep among your other rarities in your treasury, but at the
same time wish you such extraordinary health as never to have occasion
to make use of it."

After the Prince had made an end of his compliment the Sultan placed him
on his right hand, and then said to him: "Son, I am very much obliged
to you for this valuable present, as also for the great danger you have
exposed yourself to upon my account (which I have been informed of by
a magician who knows the Fountain of Lions); but do me the pleasure,"
continued he, "to inform me by what address, or, rather, by what
incredible power, you have been secured."

"Sir," replied Prince Ahmed, "I have no share in the compliment your
Majesty is pleased to make me; all the honor is due to the Fairy my
spouse, whose good advice I followed." Then he informed the Sultan what
those directions were, and by the relation of this his expedition let
him know how well he had behaved himself. When he had done the Sultan,
who showed outwardly all the demonstrations of great joy, but secretly
became more jealous, retired into an inward apartment, where he sent for
the magician.

The magician, at her arrival, saved the Sultan the trouble to tell her
of the success of Prince Ahmed's journey, which she had heard of before
she came, and therefore was prepared with an infallible means, as she
pretended. This means she communicated to the Sultan who declared it
the next day to the Prince, in the midst of all his courtiers, in these
words: "Son," said he, "I have one thing more to ask of you, after which
I shall expect nothing more from your obedience, nor your interest with
your wife. This request is, to bring me a man not above a foot and a
half high, and whose beard is thirty feet long who carries a bar of
iron upon his shoulders of five hundredweight, which he uses as a
quarterstaff."

Prince Ahmed, who did not believe that there was such a man in the world
as his father described, would gladly have excused himself; but the
Sultan persisted in his demand, and told him the Fairy could do more
incredible things.

The next day the Prince returned to his dear Paribanou, to whom he told
his father's new demand, which, he said, he looked upon to be a thing
more impossible than the two first; "for," added he, "I cannot imagine
there can be such a man in the world; without doubt, he has a mind to
try whether or no I am so silly as to go about it, or he has a design on
my ruin. In short, how can he suppose that I should lay hold of a man
so well armed, though he is but little? What arms can I make use of to
reduce him to my will? If there are any means, I beg you will tell them,
and let me come off with honor this time."

"Don't affright yourself, Prince," replied the Fairy; "you ran a risk in
fetching the Water of the Fountain of Lions for your father, but there's
no danger in finding out this man, who is my brother Schaibar, but is so
far from being like me, though we both had the same father, that he is
of so violent a nature that nothing can prevent his giving cruel marks
of his resentment for a slight offense; yet, on the other hand, is so
good as to oblige anyone in whatever they desire. He is made exactly as
the Sultan your father has described him, and has no other arms than a
bar of iron of five hundred pounds weight, without which he never stirs,
and which makes him respected. I'll send for him, and you shall judge
of the truth of what I tell you; but be sure to prepare yourself against
being frightened at his extraordinary figure when you see him." "What!
my Queen," replied Prince Ahmed, "do you say Schaibar is your brother?
Let him be never so ugly or deformed I shall be so far from being
frightened at the sight of him that, as our brother, I shall honor and
love him."

The Fairy ordered a gold chafing-dish to be set with a fire in it under
the porch of her palace, with a box of the same metal, which was a
present to her, out of which taking a perfume, and throwing it into the
fire, there arose a thick cloud of smoke.

Some moments after the Fairy said to Prince Ahmed: "See, there comes my
brother." The Prince immediately perceived Schaibar coming gravely with
his heavy bar on his shoulder, his long beard, which he held up before
him, and a pair of thick mustachios, which he tucked behind his ears and
almost covered his face; his eyes were very small and deep-set in his
head, which was far from being of the smallest size, and on his head he
wore a grenadier's cap; besides all this, he was very much hump-backed.

If Prince Ahmed had not known that Schaibar was Paribanou's brother,
he would not have been able to have looked at him without fear, but,
knowing first who he was, he stood by the Fairy without the least
concern.

Schaibar, as he came forward, looked at the Prince earnestly enough to
have chilled his blood in his veins, and asked Paribanou, when he first
accosted her, who that man was. To which she replied: "He is my husband,
brother. His name is Ahmed; he is son to the Sultan of the Indies. The
reason why I did not invite you to my wedding was I was unwilling to
divert you from an expedition you were engaged in, and from which I
heard with pleasure you returned victorious, and so took the liberty now
to call for you."

At these words, Schaibar, looking on Prince Ahmed favorably, said: "Is
there anything else, sister, wherein I can serve him? It is enough
for me that he is your husband to engage me to do for him whatever he
desires." "The Sultan, his father," replied Paribanou, "has a curiosity
to see you, and I desire he may be your guide to the Sultan's Court."
"He needs but lead me the way I'll follow him." "Brother," replied
Paribanou, "it is too late to go to-day, therefore stay till to-morrow
morning; and in the meantime I'll inform you of all that has passed
between the Sultan of the Indies and Prince Ahmed since our marriage."

The next morning, after Schaibar had been informed of the affair, he and
Prince Ahmed set out for the Sultan's Court. When they arrived at the
gates of the capital the people no sooner saw Schaibar but they ran and
hid themselves; and some shut up their shops and locked themselves up in
their houses, while others, flying, communicated their fear to all they
met, who stayed not to look behind them, but ran too; insomuch that
Schaibar and Prince Ahmed, as they went along, found the streets all
desolate till they came to the palaces where the porters, instead
of keeping the gates, ran away too, so that the Prince and Schaibar
advanced without any obstacle to the council-hall, where the Sultan was
seated on his throne, and giving audience. Here likewise the ushers,
at the approach of Schaibar, abandoned their posts, and gave them free
admittance.

Schaibar went boldly and fiercely up to the throne, without waiting to
be presented by Prince Ahmed, and accosted the Sultan of the Indies in
these words: "Thou hast asked for me," said he; "see, here I am; what
wouldst thou have with me?"

The Sultan, instead of answering him, clapped his hands before his eyes
to avoid the sight of so terrible an object; at which uncivil and rude
reception Schaibar was so much provoked, after he had given him the
trouble to come so far, that he instantly lifted up his iron bar and
killed him before Prince Ahmed could intercede in his behalf. All that
he could do was to prevent his killing the grand vizier, who sat not far
from him, representing to him that he had always given the Sultan his
father good advice. "These are they, then," said Schaibar, "who gave him
bad," and as he pronounced these words he killed all the other viziers
and flattering favorites of the Sultan who were Prince Ahmed's enemies.
Every time he struck he killed some one or other, and none escaped but
they who were not so frightened as to stand staring and gaping, and who
saved themselves by flight.

When this terrible execution was over Schaibar came out of the
council-hall into the midst of the courtyard with the iron bar upon his
shoulder, and, looking hard at the grand vizier, who owed his life to
Prince Ahmed, he said: "I know here is a certain magician, who is a
greater enemy of my brother-in-law than all these base favorites I
have chastised. Let the magician be brought to me presently." The grand
vizier immediately sent for her, and as soon as she was brought Schaibar
said, at the time he fetched a stroke at her with his iron bar: "Take
the reward of thy pernicious counsel, and learn to feign sickness
again."

After this he said: "This is not yet enough; I will use the whole town
after the same manner if they do not immediately acknowledge Prince
Ahmed, my brother-in-law, for their Sultan and the Sultan of the
Indies." Then all that were there present made the air echo again
with the repeated acclamations of: "Long life to Sultan Ahmed"; and
immediately after he was proclaimed through the whole town. Schaibar
made him be clothed in the royal vestments, installed him on the throne,
and after he had caused all to swear homage and fidelity to him went
and fetched his sister Paribanou, whom he brought with all the pomp and
grandeur imaginable, and made her to be owned Sultaness of the Indies.

As for Prince Ali and Princess Nouronnihar, as they had no hand in the
conspiracy against Prince Ahmed and knew nothing of any, Prince Ahmed
assigned them a considerable province, with its capital, where they
spent the rest of their lives. Afterwards he sent an officer to Prince
Houssain to acquaint him with the change and make him an offer of which
province he liked best; but that Prince thought himself so happy in his
solitude that he bade the officer return the Sultan his brother thanks
for the kindness he designed him, assuring him of his submission; and
that the only favor he desired of him was to give him leave to live
retired in the place he had made choice of for his retreat.(1)


(1) Arabian Nights.




THE HISTORY OF JACK THE GIANT-KILLER


In the reign of the famous King Arthur there lived in Cornwall a lad
named Jack, who was a boy of a bold temper, and took delight in hearing
or reading of conjurers, giants, and fairies; and used to listen eagerly
to the deeds of the knights of King Arthur's Round Table.

In those days there lived on St. Michael's Mount, off Cornwall, a huge
giant, eighteen feet high and nine feet round; his fierce and savage
looks were the terror of all who beheld him.

He dwelt in a gloomy cavern on the top of the mountain, and used to wade
over to the mainland in search of prey; when he would throw half a dozen
oxen upon his back, and tie three times as many sheep and hogs round his
waist, and march back to his own abode.

The giant had done this for many years when Jack resolved to destroy
him.

Jack took a horn, a shovel, a pickaxe, his armor, and a dark lantern,
and one winter's evening he went to the mount. There he dug a pit
twenty-two feet deep and twenty broad. He covered the top over so as to
make it look like solid ground. He then blew his horn so loudly that the
giant awoke and came out of his den crying out: "You saucy villain! you
shall pay for this I'll broil you for my breakfast!"

He had just finished, when, taking one step further, he tumbled headlong
into the pit, and Jack struck him a blow on the head with his pickaxe
which killed him. Jack then returned home to cheer his friends with the
news.

Another giant, called Blunderbore, vowed to be revenged on Jack if ever
he should have him in his power. This giant kept an enchanted castle in
the midst of a lonely wood; and some time after the death of Cormoran
Jack was passing through a wood, and being weary, sat down and went to
sleep.

The giant, passing by and seeing Jack, carried him to his castle, where
he locked him up in a large room, the floor of which was covered with
the bodies, skulls and bones of men and women.

Soon after the giant went to fetch his brother who was likewise a giant,
to take a meal off his flesh; and Jack saw with terror through the bars
of his prison the two giants approaching.

Jack, perceiving in one corner of the room a strong cord, took courage,
and making a slip-knot at each end, he threw them over their heads, and
tied it to the window-bars; he then pulled till he had choked them. When
they were black in the face he slid down the rope and stabbed them to
the heart.

Jack next took a great bunch of keys from the pocket of Blunderbore,
and went into the castle again. He made a strict search through all
the rooms, and in one of them found three ladies tied up by the hair
of their heads, and almost starved to death. They told him that their
husbands had been killed by the giants, who had then condemned them to
be starved to death because they would not eat the flesh of their own
dead husbands.

"Ladies," said Jack, "I have put an end to the monster and his wicked
brother; and I give you this castle and all the riches it contains, to
make some amends for the dreadful pains you have felt." He then very
politely gave them the keys of the castle, and went further on his
journey to Wales.

As Jack had but little money, he went on as fast as possible. At length
he came to a handsome house. Jack knocked at the door, when there came
forth a Welsh giant. Jack said he was a traveler who had lost his way,
on which the giant made him welcome, and let him into a room where there
was a good bed to sleep in.

Jack took off his clothes quickly, but though he was weary he could not
go to sleep. Soon after this he heard the giant walking backward and
forward in the next room, and saying to himself:

  "Though here you lodge with me this night,
  You shall not see the morning light;
  My club shall dash your brains out quite."


"Say you so?" thought Jack. "Are these your tricks upon travelers? But
I hope to prove as cunning as you are." Then, getting out of bed, he
groped about the room, and at last found a large thick billet of wood.
He laid it in his own place in the bed, and then hid himself in a dark
corner of the room.

The giant, about midnight, entered the apartment, and with his bludgeon
struck many blows on the bed, in the very place where Jack had laid the
log; and then he went back to his own room, thinking he had broken all
Jack's bones.

Early in the morning Jack put a bold face upon the matter, and walked
into the giant's room to thank him for his lodging. The giant started
when he saw him, and began to stammer out: "Oh! dear me; is it you? Pray
how did you sleep last night? Did you hear or see anything in the dead
of the night?"

"Nothing to speak of," said Jack, carelessly; "a rat, I believe, gave me
three or four slaps with its tail, and disturbed me a little; but I soon
went to sleep again."

The giant wondered more and more at this; yet he did not answer a word,
but went to bring two great bowls of hasty-pudding for their breakfast.
Jack wanted to make the giant believe that he could eat as much as
himself, so he contrived to button a leathern bag inside his coat, and
slip the hasty-pudding into this bag, while he seemed to put it into his
mouth.

When breakfast was over he said to the giant: "Now I will show you a
fine trick. I can cure all wounds with a touch; I could cut off my head
in one minute, and the next put it sound again on my shoulders. You
shall see an example." He then took hold of the knife, ripped up the
leathern bag, and all the hasty-pudding tumbled out upon the floor.

"Ods splutter hur nails!" cried the Welsh giant, who was ashamed to be
outdone by such a little fellow as Jack, "hur can do that hurself";
so he snatched up the knife, plunged it into his own stomach, and in a
moment dropped down dead.

Jack, having hitherto been successful in all his undertakings, resolved
not to be idle in future; he therefore furnished himself with a horse,
a cap of knowledge, a sword of sharpness, shoes of swiftness, and an
invisible coat, the better to perform the wonderful enterprises that lay
before him.

He traveled over high hills, and on the third day he came to a large and
spacious forest through which his road lay. Scarcely had he entered the
forest when he beheld a monstrous giant dragging along by the hair
of their heads a handsome knight and his lady. Jack alighted from his
horse, and tying him to an oak tree, put on his invisible coat, under
which he carried his sword of sharpness.

When he came up to the giant he made several strokes at him, but could
not reach his body, but wounded his thighs in several places; and at
length, putting both hands to his sword and aiming with all his might,
he cut off both his legs. Then Jack, setting his foot upon his neck,
plunged his sword into the giant's body, when the monster gave a groan
and expired.

The knight and his lady thanked Jack for their deliverance, and invited
him to their house, to receive a proper reward for his services. "No,"
said Jack, "I cannot be easy till I find out this monster's habitation."
So, taking the knight's directions, he mounted his horse and soon after
came in sight of another giant, who was sitting on a block of timber
waiting for his brother's return.

Jack alighted from his horse, and, putting on his invisible coat,
approached and aimed a blow at the giant's head, but, missing his aim,
he only cut off his nose. On this the giant seized his club and laid
about him most unmercifully.

"Nay," said Jack, "if this be the case I'd better dispatch you!" so,
jumping upon the block, he stabbed him in the back, when he dropped down
dead.

Jack then proceeded on his journey, and traveled over hills and dales,
till arriving at the foot of a high mountain he knocked at the door of a
lonely house, when an old man let him in.

When Jack was seated the hermit thus addressed him: "My son, on the top
of this mountain is an enchanted castle, kept by the giant Galligantus
and a vile magician. I lament the fate of a duke's daughter, whom they
seized as she was walking in her father's garden, and brought hither
transformed into a deer."

Jack promised that in the morning, at the risk of his life, he would
break the enchantment; and after a sound sleep he rose early, put on his
invisible coat, and got ready for the attempt.

When he had climbed to the top of the mountain he saw two fiery
griffins, but he passed between them without the least fear of danger,
for they could not see him because of his invisible coat. On the castle
gate he found a golden trumpet, under which were written these lines:

  "Whoever can this trumpet blow
  Shall cause the giant's overthrow."


As soon as Jack had read this he seized the trumpet and blew a shrill
blast, which made the gates fly open and the very castle itself tremble.

The giant and the conjurer now knew that their wicked course was at an
end, and they stood biting their thumbs and shaking with fear. Jack,
with his sword of sharpness, soon killed the giant, and the magician was
then carried away by a whirlwind; and every knight and beautiful lady
who had been changed into birds and beasts returned to their proper
shapes. The castle vanished away like smoke, and the head of the giant
Galligantus was then sent to King Arthur.

The knights and ladies rested that night at the old man's hermitage, and
next day they set out for the Court. Jack then went up to the King, and
gave his Majesty an account of all his fierce battles.

Jack's fame had now spread through the whole country, and at the King's
desire the duke gave him his daughter in marriage, to the joy of all his
kingdom. After this the King gave him a large estate, on which he and
his lady lived the rest of their days in joy and contentment.(1)


(1) Old Chapbook.




THE BLACK BULL OF NORROWAY


     And many a hunting song they sung,
       And song of game and glee;
     Then tuned to plaintive strains their tongue,
       "Of Scotland's luve and lee."
     To wilder measures next they turn
       "The Black, Black Bull of Norroway!"
     Sudden the tapers cease to burn,
       The minstrels cease to play.

            "The Cout of Keeldar," by J. Leyden.


In Norroway, langsyne, there lived a certain lady, and she had three
dochters. The auldest o' them said to her mither: "Mither, bake me a
bannock, and roast me a collop, for I'm gaun awa' to seek my fortune."
Her mither did sae; and the dochter gaed awa' to an auld witch
washerwife and telled her purpose. The auld wife bade her stay that day,
and gang and look out o' her back door, and see what she could see. She
saw nocht the first day. The second day she did the same, and saw nocht.
On the third day she looked again, and saw a coach-and-six coming along
the road. She ran in and telled the auld wife what she saw. "Aweel,"
quo' the auld wife, "yon's for you." Sae they took her into the coach,
and galloped aff.

The second dochter next says to her mither: "Mither, bake me a bannock,
and roast me a collop, fur I'm gaun awa' to seek my fortune." Her mither
did sae; and awa' she gaed to the auld wife, as her sister had dune. On
the third day she looked out o' the back door, and saw a coach-and-four
coming along the road. "Aweel," quo' the auld wife, "yon's for you." Sae
they took her in, and aff they set.

The third dochter says to her mither: "Mither, bake me a bannock, and
roast me a collop, for I'm gaun awa' to seek my fortune." Her mither did
sae; and awa' she gaed to the auld witch-wife. She bade her look out
o' her back door, and see what she could see. She did sae; and when she
came back said she saw nocht. The second day she did the same, and saw
nocht. The third day she looked again, and on coming back said to the
auld wife she saw nocht but a muckle Black Bull coming roaring alang the
road. "Aweel," quo' the auld wife, "yon's for you." On hearing this she
was next to distracted wi' grief and terror; but she was lifted up and
set on his back, and awa' they went.

Aye they traveled, and on they traveled, till the lady grew faint wi'
hunger. "Eat out o' my right lug," says the Black Bull, "and drink out
o' my left lug, and set by your leavings." Sae she did as he said, and
was wonderfully refreshed. And lang they gaed, and sair they rade, till
they came in sight o' a very big and bonny castle. "Yonder we maun be
this night," quo' the bull; "for my auld brither lives yonder"; and
presently they were at the place. They lifted her aff his back, and took
her in, and sent him away to a park for the night. In the morning,
when they brought the bull hame, they took the lady into a fine shining
parlor, and gave her a beautiful apple, telling her no to break it till
she was in the greatest strait ever mortal was in in the world, and that
wad bring her o't. Again she was lifted on the bull's back, and after
she had ridden far, and farer than I can tell, they came in sight o' a
far bonnier castle, and far farther awa' than the last. Says the bull
till her: "Yonder we maun be the night, for my second brither lives
yonder"; and they were at the place directly. They lifted her down
and took her in, and sent the bull to the field for the night. In the
morning they took the lady into a fine and rich room, and gave her the
finest pear she had ever seen, bidding her no to break it till she was
in the greatest strait ever mortal could be in, and that wad get her out
o't. Again she was lifted and set on his back, and awa' they went. And
lang they gaed, and sair they rade, till they came in sight o' the far
biggest castle, and far farthest aff, they had yet seen. "We maun be
yonder the night," says the bull, "for my young brither lives yonder";
and they were there directly. They lifted her down, took her in, and
sent the bull to the field for the night. In the morning they took her
into a room, the finest of a', and gied her a plum, telling her no to
break it till she was in the greatest strait mortal could be in, and
that wad get her out o't. Presently they brought hame the bull, set the
lady on his back, and awa' they went.

And aye they gaed, and on they rade, till they came to a dark and ugsome
glen, where they stopped, and the lady lighted down. Says the bull to
her: "Here ye maun stay till I gang and fight the deil. Ye maun seat
yoursel' on that stane, and move neither hand nor fit till I come back,
else I'll never find ye again. And if everything round about ye turns
blue I hae beated the deil; but should a' things turn red he'll hae
conquered me." She set hersel' down on the stane, and by-and-by a' round
her turned blue. O'ercome wi' joy, she lifted the ae fit and crossed it
owre the ither, sae glad was she that her companion was victorious. The
bull returned and sought for but never could find her.

Lang she sat, and aye she grat, till she wearied. At last she rase and
gaed awa', she kedna whaur till. On she wandered till she came to a
great hill o' glass, that she tried a' she could to climb, bat wasna
able. Round the bottom o' the hill she gaed, sabbing and seeking a
passage owre, till at last she came to a smith's house; and the smith
promised, if she wad serve him seven years, he wad make her iron shoon,
wherewi' she could climb owre the glassy hill. At seven years' end she
got her iron shoon, clamb the glassy hill, and chanced to come to the
auld washerwife's habitation. There she was telled of a gallant young
knight that had given in some bluidy sarks to wash, and whaever washed
thae sarks was to be his wife. The auld wife had washed till she was
tired, and then she set to her dochter, and baith washed, and they
washed, and they better washed, in hopes of getting the young knight;
but a' they could do they couldna bring out a stain. At length they set
the stranger damosel to wark; and whenever she began the stains came
out pure and clean, but the auld wife made the knight believe it was her
dochter had washed the sarks. So the knight and the eldest dochter were
to be married, and the stranger damosel was distracted at the thought
of it, for she was deeply in love wi' him. So she bethought her of her
apple, and breaking it, found it filled with gold and precious jewelry,
the richest she had ever seen. "All these," she said to the eldest
dochter, "I will give you, on condition that you put off your marriage
for ae day, and allow me to go into his room alone at night." So
the lady consented; but meanwhile the auld wife had prepared a
sleeping-drink, and given it to the knight, wha drank it, and never
wakened till next morning. The lee-lang night ther damosel sabbed and
sang:

  "Seven lang years I served for thee,
  The glassy hill I clamb for thee,
  The bluidy shirt I wrang for thee;
  And wilt thou no wauken and turn to me?"


Next day she kentna what to do for grief. She then brak the pear, and
found it filled wi' jewelry far richer than the contents o' the apple.
Wi' thae jewels she bargained for permission to be a second night in
the young knight's chamber; but the auld wife gied him anither
sleeping-drink, and he again sleepit till morning. A' night she kept
sighing and singing as before:

"Seven lang years I served for thee," &c. Still he sleepit, and she
nearly lost hope a'thegither. But that day when he was out at the
hunting, somebody asked him what noise and moaning was yon they heard
all last night in his bedchamber. He said he heardna ony noise. But they
assured him there was sae; and he resolved to keep waking that night
to try what he could hear. That being the third night, and the damosel
being between hope and despair, she brak her plum, and it held far the
richest jewelry of the three. She bargained as before; and the auld
wife, as before, took in the sleeping-drink to the young knight's
chamber; but he telled her he couldna drink it that night without
sweetening. And when she gaed awa' for some honey to sweeten it wi', he
poured out the drink, and sae made the auld wife think he had drunk it.
They a' went to bed again, and the damosel began, as before, singing:

  "Seven lang years I served for thee,
  The glassy hill I clamb for thee,
  The bluidy shirt I wrang for thee;
  And wilt thou no wauken and turn to me?"

He heard, and turned to her. And she telled him a' that had befa'en her,
and he telled her a' that had happened to him. And he caused the auld
washerwife and her dochter to be burned. And they were married, and he
and she are living happy till this day, for aught I ken.(1)


(1) Chambers, Popular Traditions of Scotland.




THE RED ETIN


There were ance twa widows that lived on a small bit o' ground, which
they rented from a farmer. Ane of them had twa sons, and the other had
ane; and by-and-by it was time for the wife that had twa sons to send
them away to seeke their fortune. So she told her eldest son ae day to
take a can and bring her water from the well, that she might bake a cake
for him; and however much or however little water he might bring, the
cake would be great or sma' accordingly; and that cake was to be a' that
she could gie him when he went on his travels.

The lad gaed away wi' the can to the well, and filled it wi' water, and
then came away hame again; but the can being broken the maist part of
the water had run out before he got back. So his cake was very sma'; yet
sma' as it was, his mother asked if he was willing to take the half of
it with her blessing, telling him that, if he chose rather to have the
hale, he would only get it wi' her curse. The young man, thinking he
might hae to travel a far way, and not knowing when or how he might get
other provisions, said he would like to hae the hale cake, com of his
mother's malison what like; so she gave him the hale cake, and her
malison alang wi't. Then he took his brither aside, and gave him a
knife to keep till he should come back, desiring him to look at it every
morning, and as lang as it continued to be clear, then he might be sure
that the owner of it was well; but if it grew dim and rusty, then for
certain some ill had befallen him.

So the young man set out to seek his fortune. And he gaed a' that day,
and a' the next day; and on the third day, in the afternoon, he came up
to where a shepherd was sitting with a flock o' sheep. And he gaed up
to the shepherd and asked him wha the sheep belanged to; and the man
answered:


     "The Red Etin of Ireland
       Ance lived in Bellygan,
     And stole King Malcolm's daughter,
       The King of fair Scotland.
     He beats her, he binds her,
       He lays her on a band;
     And every day he dings her
       With a bright silver wand
     Like Julian the Roman
     He's one that fears no man.
     It's said there's ane predestinate
       To be his mortal foe;
     But that man is yet unborn
       And lang may it be so."

The young man then went on his journey; and he had not gone far when he
espied an old man with white locks herding a flock of swine; and he gaed
up to him and asked whose swine these were, when the man answered:

     "The Red Etin of Ireland"--
            (Repeat the verses above.)

Then the young man gaed on a bit farther, and came to another very old
man herding goats; and when he asked whose goats they were, the answer
was:

     "The Red Etin of Ireland"--
            (Repeat the verses again.)

This old man also told him to beware of the next beasts that he should
meet, for they were of a very different kind from any he had yet seen.

So the young man went on, and by-and-by he saw a multitude of very
dreadfu' beasts, ilk ane o' them wi' twa heads, and on every head four
horns. And he was sore frightened, and ran away from them as fast as he
could; and glad was he when he came to a castle that stood on a hillock,
wi' the door standing wide to the wa'. And he gaed into the castle for
shelter, and there he saw an auld wife sitting beside the kitchen fire.
He asked the wife if he might stay there for the night, as he was tired
wi' a lang journey; and the wife said he might, but it was not a good
place for him to be in, as it belanged to the Red Etin, who was a very
terrible beast, wi' three heads, that spared no living man he could get
hold of. The young man would have gone away, but he was afraid of the
beasts on the outside of the castle; so he beseeched the old woman to
conceal him as well as she could, and not to tell the Etin that he was
there. He thought, if he could put over the night, he might get away in
the morning without meeting wi' the beasts, and so escape. But he had
not been long in his hidy-hole before the awful Etin came in; and nae
sooner was he in than he was heard crying:

  "Snouk but and snouk ben,
  I find the smell of an earthly man;
  Be he living, or be he dead,
  His heart this night shall kitchen(1) my bread."


(1) "Kitchen," that is, "season."


The monster soon found the poor young man, and pulled him from his hole.
And when he had got him out he told him that if he could answer him
three questions his life should be spared. The first was: Whether
Ireland or Scotland was first inhabited? The second was: Whether man was
made for woman, or woman for man? The third was: Whether men or
brutes were made first? The lad not being able to answer one of these
questions, the Red Etin took a mace and knocked him on the head, and
turned him into a pillar of stone.

On the morning after this happened the younger brither took out the
knife to look at it, and he was grieved to find it a' brown wi' rust. He
told his mother that the time was now come for him to go away upon
his travels also; so she requested him to take the can to the well for
water, that she might bake a cake for him. The can being broken, he
brought hame as little water as the other had done, and the cake was as
little. She asked whether he would have the hale cake wi' her malison,
or the half wi' her blessing; and, like his brither, he thought it best
to have the hale cake, come o' the malison what might. So he gaed away;
and everything happened to him that had happened to his brother!

The other widow and her son heard of a' that had happened frae a fairy,
and the young man determined that he would also go upon his travels, and
see if he could do anything to relieve his twa friends. So his mother
gave him a can to go to the well and bring home water, that she might
bake him a cake for his journey. And he gaed, and as he was bringing
hame the water, a raven owre abune his head cried to him to look, and
he would see that the water was running out. And he was a young man of
sense, and seeing the water running out, he took some clay and patched
up the holes, so that he brought home enough water to bake a large cake.
When his mother put it to him to take the half-cake wi' her blessing,
he took it in preference to having the hale wi' her malison; and yet the
half was bigger than what the other lads had got a'thegither.

So he gaed away on his journey; and after he had traveled a far way he
met wi' an auld woman, that asked him if he would give her a bit of his
bannock. And he said he would gladly do that, and so he gave her a piece
of the bannock; and for that she gied him a magical wand, that she said
might yet be of service to him if he took care to use it rightly. Then
the auld woman, who was a fairy, told him a great deal that whould
happen to him, and what he ought to do in a' circumstances; and after
that she vanished in an instant out o' his sight. He gaed on a great way
farther, and then he came up to the old man herding the sheep; and when
he asked whose sheep these were, the answer was:

      "The Red Etin of Ireland
        Ance lived in Bellygan,
      And stole King Malcolm's daughter,
        The King of fair Scotland.
      He beats her, he binds her,
        He lays her on a band;
      And every day he dings her
        With a bright silver wand.
      Like Julian the Roman,
      He's one that fears no man,
      But now I fear his end is near,
        And destiny at hand;
      And you're to be, I plainly see,
        The heir of all his land."

(Repeat the same inquiries to the man attending the swine and the man
attending the goats, with the same answer in each case.)


When he came to the place where the monstrous beasts were standing, he
did not stop nor run away, but went boldly through among them. One came
up roaring with open mouth to devour him, when he struck it with his
wand, and laid it in an instant dead at his feet. He soon came to the
Etin's castle, where he knocked, and was admitted. The auld woman that
sat by the fire warned him of the terrible Etin, and what had been the
fate of the twa brithers; but he was not to be daunted. The monster soon
came in, saying:

  "Snouk but and snouk ben,
  I find the smell of an earthly man;
  Be he living, or be he dead,
  His heart shall be kitchen to my bread."

He quickly espied the young man, and bade him come forth on the floor.
And then he put the three questions to him, but the young man had been
told everything by the good fairy, so he was able to answer all the
questions. When the Etin found this he knew that his power was gone. The
young man then took up the axe and hewed off the monster's three heads.
He next asked the old woman to show him where the King's daughters lay;
and the old woman took him upstairs and opened a great many doors, and
out of every door came a beautiful lady who had been imprisoned there by
the Etin; and ane o' the ladies was the King's daughter. She also took
him down into a low room, and there stood two stone pillars that he had
only to touch wi' his wand, when his two friends and neighbors started
into life. And the hale o' the prisoners were overjoyed at their
deliverance, which they all acknowledged to be owing to the prudent
young man. Next day they a' set out for the King's Court, and a gallant
company they made. And the King married his daughter to the young man
that had delivered her, and gave a noble's daughter to ilk ane o' the
other young men; and so they a' lived happily a' the rest o' their
days.(1)


(1) Chambers, Popular Traditions of Scotland.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLUE FAIRY BOOK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Grimm's Fairy Stories
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Grimm's Fairy Stories

Author: Jacob Grimm
        Wilhelm Grimm

Illustrator: Johnny Gruelle
        Robert Emmett Owen

Release date: February 1, 2004 [eBook #11027]
                Most recently updated: December 23, 2020

Language: English

Credits: E-text prepared by Internet Archive, University of Florida, Children, and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRIMM'S FAIRY STORIES ***


E-text prepared by Internet Archive, University of Florida, Children, and
the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 11027-h.htm or 11027-h.zip:
      (http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/1/1/0/2/11027/11027-h/11027-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/1/1/0/2/11027/11027-h.zip)





GRIMM'S FAIRY STORIES

Colored Illustrations by JOHN B. GRUELLE

Pen and Ink Sketches by R. EMMETT OWEN

1922







CONTENTS


THE GOOSE-GIRL

THE LITTLE BROTHER AND SISTER

HANSEL AND GRETHEL

OH, IF I COULD BUT SHIVER!

DUMMLING AND THE THREE FEATHERS

LITTLE SNOW-WHITE

CATHERINE AND FREDERICK

THE VALIANT LITTLE TAILOR

LITTLE RED-CAP

THE GOLDEN GOOSE

BEARSKIN

CINDERELLA

FAITHFUL JOHN

THE WATER OF LIFE

THUMBLING

BRIAR ROSE

THE SIX SWANS

RAPUNZEL

MOTHER HOLLE

THE FROG PRINCE

THE TRAVELS OF TOM THUMB

SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED

THE THREE LITTLE MEN IN THE WOOD

RUMPELSTILTSKIN

LITTLE ONE-EYE, TWO-EYES AND THREE-EYES




[Illustration: Grimm's Fairy Stories]




THE GOOSE-GIRL


An old queen, whose husband had been dead some years, had a beautiful
daughter. When she grew up, she was betrothed to a prince who lived a
great way off; and as the time drew near for her to be married, she got
ready to set off on her journey to his country. Then the queen, her
mother, packed up a great many costly things--jewels, and gold, and
silver, trinkets, fine dresses, and in short, everything that became a
royal bride; for she loved her child very dearly; and she gave her a
waiting-maid to ride with her, and give her into the bridegroom's hands;
and each had a horse for the journey. Now the princess' horse was called
Falada, and could speak.

When the time came for them to set out, the old queen went into her
bed-chamber, and took a little knife, and cut off a lock of her hair,
and gave it to her daughter, saying, "Take care of it, dear child; for
it is a charm that may be of use to you on the road." Then they took a
sorrowful leave of each other, and the princess put the lock of her
mother's hair into her bosom, got upon her horse, and set off on her
journey to her bridegroom's kingdom.

One day, as they were riding along by the side of a brook, the princess
began to feel very thirsty, and said to her maid, "Pray get down and
fetch me some water in my golden cup out of yonder brook, for I want to
drink." "Nay," said the maid, "if you are thirsty, get down yourself,
and lie down by the water and drink; I shall not be your waiting-maid
any longer." The princess was so thirsty that she got down, and knelt
over the little brook and drank, for she was frightened, and dared not
bring out her golden cup; and then she wept, and said, "Alas! what will
become of me?" And the lock of hair answered her, and said--

  "Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly her heart would rue it."

But the princess was very humble and meek, so she said nothing to her
maid's ill behavior, but got upon her horse again.

Then all rode further on their journey, till the day grew so warm, and
the sun so scorching, that the bride began to feel very thirsty again;
and at last, when they came to a river, she forgot her maid's rude
speech, and said, "Pray get down and fetch me some water to drink in my
golden cup." But the maid answered her, and even spoke more haughtily
than before, "Drink if you will, but I shall not be your waiting-maid."
Then the princess was so thirsty that she got off her horse and lay
down, and held her head over the running stream, and cried, and said,
"What will become of me?" And the lock of hair answered her again--

  "Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly her heart would rue it."

And as she leaned down to drink, the lock of hair fell from her bosom
and floated away with the water, without her seeing it, she was so much
frightened. But her maid saw it, and was very glad, for she knew the
charm, and saw that the poor bride would be in her power now that she
had lost the hair. So when the bride had finished drinking, and would
have got upon Falada again, the maid said, "I shall ride upon Falada,
and you may have my horse instead;" so she was forced to give up her
horse, and soon afterwards to take off her royal clothes, and put on her
maid's shabby ones.

At last, as they drew near the end of the journey, this treacherous
servant threatened to kill her mistress if she ever told anyone what had
happened. But Falada saw it all, and marked it well. Then the
waiting-maid got upon Falada, and the real bride was set upon the other
horse, and they went on in this way till at last they came to the royal
court. There was great joy at their coming, and the prince hurried to
meet them, and lifted the maid from her horse, thinking she was the one
who was to be his wife; and she was led upstairs to the royal chamber,
but the true princess was told to stay in the court below.

However, the old king happened to be looking out of the window, and saw
her in the yard below; and as she looked very pretty, and too delicate
for a waiting-maid, he went into the royal chamber to ask the bride whom
it was she had brought with her, that was thus left standing in the
court below. "I brought her with me for the sake of her company on the
road," said she. "Pray give the girl some work to do, that she may not
be idle." The old king could not for some time think of any work for
her, but at last he said, "I have a lad who takes care of my geese; she
may go and help him." Now the name of this lad, that the real bride was
to help in watching the king's geese, was Curdken.

Soon after, the false bride said to the prince, "Dear husband, pray do
me one piece of kindness." "That I will," said the prince. "Then tell
one of your slaughterers to cut off the head of the horse I rode upon,
for it was very unruly, and plagued me sadly on the road." But the truth
was, she was very much afraid lest Falada should speak, and tell all she
had done to the princess. She carried her point, and the faithful Falada
was killed; but when the true princess heard of it she wept, and begged
the man to nail up Falada's head against a large dark gate in the city
through which she had to pass every morning and evening, that there she
might still see him sometimes. Then the slaughterer said he would do as
she wished, so he cut off the head and nailed it fast under the dark
gate.

Early the next morning, as the princess and Curdken went out through the
gate, she said sorrowfully--

  "Falada, Falada, there thou art hanging!"

and the head answered--

  "Bride, bride, there thou are ganging!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly her heart would rue it."

Then they went out of the city, driving the geese. And when they came to
the meadow, the princess sat down upon a bank there and let down her
waving locks of hair, which were all of pure gold; and when Curdken saw
it glitter in the sun, he ran up, and would have pulled some of the
locks out; but she cried--

  "Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken's hat go!
  Blow breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!

  "O'er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl'd,
  Till the golden locks
  Are all comb'd and curl'd!"

Then there came a wind, so strong that it blew off Curdken's hat, and
away it flew over the hills, and he after it; till, by the time he came
back, she had done combing and curling her hair, and put it up again
safely. Then he was very angry and sulky, and would not speak to her at
all; but they watched the geese until it grew dark in the evening, and
then drove them homewards.

The next morning, as they were going through the dark gate, the poor
girl looked up at Falada's head, and cried--

  "Falada, Falada, there thou art hanging!"

and it answered--

  "Bride, bride, there thou are ganging!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly her heart would rue it."

Then she drove on the geese and sat down again in the meadow, and began
to comb out her hair as before, and Curdken ran up to her, and wanted to
take of it; but she cried out quickly--

  "Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken's hat go!
  Blow breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O'er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl'd,
  Till the golden locks
  Are all comb'd and curl'd!"

Then the wind came and blew off his hat, and off it flew a great
distance over the hills and far away, so that he had to run after it:
and when he came back, she had done up her hair again, and all was safe.
So they watched the geese till it grew dark.

In the evening, after they came home, Curdken went to the old king, and
said, "I cannot have that strange girl to help me to keep the geese any
longer."

"Why?" inquired the king.

"Because she does nothing but tease me all day long."

Then the king made him tell him all that had passed.

And Curdken said, "When we go in the morning through the dark gate with
our flock of geese, she weeps, and talks with the head of a horse that
hangs upon the wall, and says--

  "Falada, Falada, there thou art hanging!"

and the head answers--

  "Bride, bride, there thou are ganging!
  Alas! alas! if thy mother knew it,
  Sadly, sadly her heart would rue it."

And Curdken went on telling the king what had happened upon the meadow
where the geese fed; and how his hat was blown away, and he was forced
to run after it, and leave his flock. But the old king told him to go
out again as usual the next day: and when morning came, he placed
himself behind the dark gate, and heard how the princess spoke, and how
Falada answered; and then he went into the field and hid himself in a
bush by the meadow's side, and soon saw with his own eyes how they drove
the flock of geese, and how, after a little time, she let down her hair
that glittered in the sun; and then he heard her say--

  "Blow, breezes, blow!
  Let Curdken's hat go!
  Blow breezes, blow!
  Let him after it go!
  O'er hills, dales, and rocks,
  Away be it whirl'd,
  Till the golden locks
  Are all comb'd and curl'd!"

And soon came a gale of wind, and carried away Curdken's hat, while the
girl went on combing and curling her hair.

All this the old king saw; so he went home without being seen; and when
the goose-girl came back in the evening, he called her aside, and asked
her why she did so; but she burst into tears, and said, "That I must not
tell you or any man, or I shall lose my life."

But the old king begged so hard that she had no peace till she had told
him all, word for word: and it was very lucky for her that she did so,
for the king ordered royal clothes to be put upon her, and he gazed with
wonder, she was so beautiful.

Then he called his son, and told him that he had only the false bride,
for that she was merely a waiting-maid, while the true one stood by.

And the young king rejoiced when he saw her beauty, and heard how meek
and patient she had been; and without saying anything, he ordered a
great feast to be prepared for all his court.

The bridegroom sat at the top, with the false princess on one side, and
the true one on the other; but nobody knew her, for she was quite
dazzling to their eyes, and was not at all like the little goose-girl,
now that she had on her brilliant dress.

When they had eaten and drunk, and were very merry, the old king told
all the story, as one that he had once heard of, and asked the true
waiting-maid what she thought ought to be done to anyone who would
behave thus.

"Nothing better," said this false bride, "than that she should be thrown
into a cask stuck around with sharp nails, and that two white horses
should be put to it, and should drag it from street to street till she
is dead."

"Thou art she!" said the old king; "and since thou hast judged thyself,
it shall be so done to thee."

Then the young king was married to his true wife, and they reigned over
the kingdom in peace and happiness all their lives.




THE LITTLE BROTHER AND SISTER


There was once a little brother who took his Sister by the hand, and
said, "Since our own dear mother's death we have not had one happy hour;
our stepmother beats us every day, and, when we come near her, kicks us
away with her foot. Come, let us wander forth into the wide world." So
all day long they travelled over meadows, fields, and stony roads. By
the evening they came into a large forest, and laid themselves down in a
hollow tree, and went to sleep. When they awoke the next morning, the
sun had already risen high in the heavens, and its beams made the tree
so hot that the little boy said to his sister, "I am so very thirsty,
that if I knew where there was a brook, I would go and drink. Ah! I
think I hear one running;" and so saying, he got up, and taking his
Sister's hand they went to look for the brook.

The wicked stepmother, however, was a witch, and had witnessed the
departure of the two children: so, sneaking after them secretly, as is
the habit of witches, she had enchanted all the springs in the forest.

Presently they found a brook, which ran trippingly over the pebbles, and
the Brother would have drunk out of it, but the Sister heard how it said
as it ran along, "Who drinks of me will become a tiger!" So the Sister
exclaimed, "I pray you, Brother, drink not, or you will become a tiger,
and tear me to pieces!" So the Brother did not drink, although his
thirst was very great, and he said, "I will wait till the next brook."
As they came to the second, the Sister heard it say, "Who drinks of me
becomes a wolf!" The Sister ran up crying, "Brother, do not, pray do not
drink, or you will become a wolf and eat me up!" Then the Brother did
not drink, saying, "I will wait until we come to the next spring, but
then I must drink, you may say what you will; my thirst is much too
great." Just as they reached the third brook, the Sister heard the voice
saying, "Who drinks of me will become a fawn--who drinks of me will
become a fawn!" So the Sister said, "Oh, my Brother do not drink, or you
will be changed into a fawn, and run away from me!" But he had already
kneeled down, and he drank of the water, and, as the first drops passed
his lips, his shape took that of a fawn.

At first the Sister wept over her little, changed Brother, and he wept
too, and knelt by her, very sorrowful; but at last the maiden said, "Be
still, dear little fawn, and I will never forsake you!" and, taking off
her golden garter, she placed it around his neck, and, weaving rushes,
made a girdle to lead him with. This she tied to him, and taking the
other end in her hand, she led him away, and they travelled deeper and
deeper into the forest. After they had gone a long distance they came to
a little hut, and the maiden, peeping in, found it empty, and thought,
"Here we can stay and dwell." Then she looked for leaves and moss to
make a soft couch for the Fawn, and every morning she went out and
collected roots and berries and nuts for herself, and tender grass for
the Fawn. In the evening when the Sister was tired, and had said her
prayers, she laid her head upon the back of the Fawn, which served for a
pillow, on which she slept soundly. Had but the Brother regained his own
proper form, their lives would have been happy indeed.

Thus they dwelt in this wilderness, and some time had elapsed when it
happened that the King of the country had a great hunt in the forest;
and now sounded through the trees the blowing of horns, the barking of
dogs, and the lusty cry of the hunters, so that the little Fawn heard
them, and wanted very much to join in. "Ah!" said he to his Sister, "let
me go to the hunt, I cannot restrain myself any longer;" and he begged
so hard that at last she consented. "But," she told him, "return again
in the evening, for I shall shut my door against the wild huntsmen, and,
that I may know you, do you knock, and say, 'Sister, dear, let me in,'
and if you do not speak I shall not open the door."

As soon as she had said this, the little Fawn sprang off quite glad and
merry in the fresh breeze. The King and his huntsmen perceived the
beautiful animal, and pursued him; but they could not catch him, and
when they thought they certainly had him, he sprang away over the
bushes, and got out of sight. Just as it was getting dark, he ran up to
the hut, and, knocking, said, "Sister mine, let me in." Then she
unfastened the little door, and he went in, and rested all night long
upon his soft couch. The next morning the hunt was commenced again, and
as soon as the little Fawn heard the horns and the tally-ho of the
sportsmen he could not rest, and said, "Sister, dear, open the door; I
must be off." The Sister opened it, saying, "Return at evening, mind,
and say the words as before." When the King and his huntsmen saw him
again, the Fawn with the golden necklace, they followed him, close, but
he was too nimble and quick for them. The whole day long they kept up
with him, but towards evening the huntsmen made a circle around him, and
one wounded him slightly in the hinder foot, so that he could run but
slowly. Then one of them slipped after him to the little hut, and heard
him say, "Sister, dear, open the door," and saw that the door was opened
and immediately shut behind him. The huntsman, having observed all this,
went and told the King what he had seen and heard, and he said, "On the
morrow I will pursue him once again."

The Sister, however, was terribly afraid when she saw that her Fawn was
wounded, and, washing off the blood, she put herbs upon the foot, and
said, "Go and rest upon your bed, dear Fawn, that your wound may heal."
It was so slight, that the next morning he felt nothing of it, and when
he heard the hunting cries outside, he exclaimed, "I cannot stop away--I
must be there, and none shall catch me so easily again!" The Sister wept
very much and told him, "Soon will they kill you, and I shall be here
alone in this forest, forsaken by all the world: I cannot let you go."

"I shall die here in vexation," answered the Fawn, "if you do not, for
when I hear the horn, I think I shall jump out of my skin." The Sister,
finding she could not prevent him, opened the door, with a heavy heart,
and the Fawn jumped out, quite delighted, into the forest. As soon as
the King perceived him, he said to his huntsmen, "Follow him all day
long till the evening, but let no one do him any harm." Then when the
sun had set, the King asked his huntsman to show him the hut; and as
they came to it he knocked at the door and said, "Let me in, dear
Sister." Upon this the door opened, and, stepping in, the King saw a
maiden more beautiful than he had ever beheld before. She was frightened
when she saw not her Fawn, but a man enter, who had a golden crown upon
his head. But the King, looking at her with a kindly glance, held out to
her his hand, saying, "Will you go with me to my castle, and be my dear
wife?" "Oh, yes," replied the maiden; "but the Fawn must go too: him I
will never forsake." The King replied, "He shall remain with you as long
as you live, and shall never want."

The King took the beautiful maiden upon his horse, and rode to his
castle, where the wedding was celebrated with great splendor and she
became Queen, and they lived together a long time; while the Fawn was
taken care of and played about the castle garden.

The wicked stepmother, however, on whose account the children had
wandered forth into the world, had supposed that long ago the Sister had
been torn into pieces by the wild beasts, and the little Brother in his
Fawn's shape hunted to death by the hunters. As soon, therefore, as she
heard how happy they had become, and how everything prospered with them,
envy and jealousy were aroused in her wicked heart, and left her no
peace; and she was always thinking in what way she could bring
misfortune upon them.

Her own daughter, who was as ugly as night, and had but one eye, for
which she was continually reproached, said, "The luck of being a Queen
has never happened to me." "Be quiet, now," replied the old woman, "and
make yourself contented: when the time comes I will help and assist
you." As soon, then, as the time came when the Queen gave birth to a
beautiful little boy, which happened when the King was out hunting, the
old witch took the form of a chambermaid, and got into the room where
the Queen was lying, and said to her, "The bath is ready, which will
restore you and give you fresh strength; be quick before it gets cold."
Her daughter being at hand, they carried the weak Queen between them
into the room, and laid her in the bath, and then, shutting the door,
they ran off; but first they made up an immense fire in the stove, which
must soon suffocate the poor young Queen.

When this was done, the old woman took her daughter, and, putting a cap
upon her head, laid her in the bed in the Queen's place. She gave her,
too, the form and appearance of the real Queen, as far as she was able;
but she could not restore the lost eye, and, so that the King might not
notice it, she turned her upon that side where there was no eye.

When midnight came, and every one was asleep, the nurse, who sat by
herself, wide awake, near the cradle, in the nursery, saw the door open
and the true Queen come in. She took the child in her arms, and rocked
it a while, and then, shaking up its pillow, laid it down in its cradle,
and covered it over again. She did not forget the Fawn, either, but
going to the corner where he was, stroked his head, and then went
silently out of the door. The nurse asked in the morning of the guards
if any one had passed into the castle during the night; but they
answered, "No, we have not seen anybody." For many nights afterwards she
came constantly, but never spoke a word; and the nurse saw her always,
but she would not trust herself to speak about it to any one.

When some time had passed away, the Queen one night began to speak, and
said--

  "How fares my child! how fares my fawn?
  Twice more will I come, but never again."

The nurse made no reply; but, when she had disappeared, went to the
King, and told him. The King exclaimed, "Oh, mercy! what does this
mean?--the next night I will watch myself by the child." So in the
evening he went into the nursery, and about midnight the Queen appeared,
and said--

  "How fares my child! how fares my fawn?
  Once more will I come, but never again."

And she nursed the child, as she usually did, and then disappeared. The
King dared not speak; but he watched the following night, and this time
she said--

  "How fares my child! how fares my fawn?
  This time have I come, but never again."

At these words the King could hold back no longer, but, springing up,
cried, "You can be no other than my dear wife!" Then she answered, "Yes,
I am your dear wife;" and at that moment her life was restored by God's
mercy, and she was again as beautiful and charming as ever. She told the
King the fraud which the witch and her daughter had practised upon him,
and he had them both tried, and sentence was pronounced against them.
The little Fawn was disenchanted, and received once more his human form;
and the Brother and Sister lived happily together to the end of their
days.




HANSEL AND GRETHEL


Once upon a time there dwelt near a large wood a poor woodcutter, with
his wife and two children by his former marriage, a little boy called
Hansel, and a girl named Grethel. He had little enough to break or bite;
and once, when there was a great famine in the land, he could not
procure even his daily bread; and as he lay thinking in his bed one
evening, rolling about for trouble, he sighed, and said to his wife,
"What will become of us? How can we feed our children, when we have no
more than we can eat ourselves?"

"Know, then, my husband," answered she, "we will lead them away, quite
early in the morning, into the thickest part of the wood, and there make
them a fire, and give them each a little piece of bread; then we will go
to our work, and leave them alone, so they will not find the way home
again, and we shall be freed from them." "No, wife," replied he, "that I
can never do. How can you bring your heart to leave my children all
alone in the wood, for the wild beasts will soon come and tear them to
pieces?"

"Oh, you simpleton!" said she, "then we must all four die of hunger; you
had better plane the coffins for us." But she left him no peace till he
consented, saying, "Ah, but I shall regret the poor children."

The two children, however, had not gone to sleep for very hunger, and so
they overheard what the stepmother said to their father. Grethel wept
bitterly, and said to Hansel, "What will become of us?" "Be quiet,
Grethel," said he; "do not cry--I will soon help you." And as soon as
their parents had fallen asleep, he got up, put on his coat, and,
unbarring the back door, slipped out. The moon shone brilliantly, and
the white pebbles which lay before the door seemed like silver pieces,
they glittered so brightly. Hansel stooped down, and put as many into
his pocket as it would hold; and then going back, he said to Grethel,
"Be comforted, dear sister, and sleep in peace; God will not forsake
us." And so saying, he went to bed again.

The next morning, before the sun arose, the wife went and awoke the two
children. "Get up, you lazy things; we are going into the forest to chop
wood." Then she gave them each a piece of bread, saying, "There is
something for your dinner; do not eat it before the time, for you will
get nothing else." Grethel took the bread in her apron, for Hansel's
pocket was full of pebbles; and so they all set out upon their way. When
they had gone a little distance, Hansel stood still, and peeped back at
the house; and this he repeated several times, till his father said,
"Hansel, what are you peeping at, and why do you lag behind? Take care,
and remember your legs."

"Ah, father," said Hansel, "I am looking at my white cat sitting upon
the roof of the house, and trying to say good-bye." "You simpleton!"
said the wife, "that is not a cat; it is only the sun shining on the
white chimney." But in reality Hansel was not looking at a cat; but
every time he stopped, he dropped a pebble out of his pocket upon the
path.

When they came to the middle of the forest, the father told the children
to collect wood, and he would make them a fire, so that they should not
be cold. So Hansel and Grethel gathered together quite a little mountain
of twigs. Then they set fire to them; and as the flame burnt up high,
the wife said, "Now, you children, lie down near the fire, and rest
yourselves, while we go into the forest and chop wood; when we are
ready, I will come and call you."

Hansel and Grethel sat down by the fire, and when it was noon, each ate
the piece of bread; and because they could hear the blows of an axe,
they thought their father was near: but it was not an axe, but a branch
which he had bound to a withered tree, so as to be blown to and fro by
the wind. They waited so long that at last their eyes closed from
weariness, and they fell fast asleep. When they awoke, it was quite
dark, and Grethel began to cry, "How shall we get out of the wood?" But
Hansel tried to comfort her by saying, "Wait a little while till the
moon rises, and then we will quickly find the way." The moon soon shone
forth, and Hansel, taking his sister's hand, followed the pebbles, which
glittered like new-coined silver pieces, and showed them the path. All
night long they walked on, and as day broke they came to their father's
house. They knocked at the door, and when the wife opened it, and saw
Hansel and Grethel, she exclaimed, "You wicked children! why did you
sleep so long in the wood? We thought you were never coming home again."
But their father was very glad, for it had grieved his heart to leave
them all alone.

Not long afterward there was again great scarcity in every corner of the
land; and one night the children overheard their stepmother saying to
their father, "Everything is again consumed; we have only half a loaf
left, and then the song is ended: the children must be sent away. We
will take them deeper into the wood, so that they may not find the way
out again; it is the only means of escape for us."

But her husband felt heavy at heart, and thought, "It were better to
share the last crust with the children." His wife, however, would listen
to nothing that he said, and scolded and reproached him without end.

He who says A must say B too; and he who consents the first time must
also the second.

The children, however, had heard the conversation as they lay awake, and
as soon as the old people went to sleep Hansel got up, intending to pick
up some pebbles as before; but the wife had locked the door, so that he
could not get out. Nevertheless, he comforted Grethel, saying, "Do not
cry; sleep in quiet; the good God will not forsake us."

Early in the morning the stepmother came and pulled them out of bed, and
gave them each a slice of bread, which was still smaller than the former
piece. On the way, Hansel broke his in his pocket, and, stooping every
now and then, dropped a crumb upon the path. "Hansel, why do you stop
and look about?" said the father; "keep in the path." "I am looking at
my little dove," answered Hansel, "nodding a good-bye to me."
"Simpleton!" said the wife, "that is no dove, but only the sun shining
on the chimney." But Hansel still kept dropping crumbs as he went along.

The mother led the children deep into the wood, where they had never
been before, and there making an immense fire, she said to them, "Sit
down here and rest, and when you feel tired you can sleep for a little
while. We are going into the forest to hew wood, and in the evening,
when we are ready, we will come and fetch you."

When noon came Grethel shared her bread with Hansel, who had strewn his
on the path. Then they went to sleep; but the evening arrived and no one
came to visit the poor children, and in the dark night they awoke, and
Hansel comforted his sister by saying, "Only wait, Grethel, till the
moon comes out, then we shall see the crumbs of bread which I have
dropped, and they will show us the way home." The moon shone and they
got up, but they could not see any crumbs, for the thousands of birds
which had been flying about in the woods and fields had picked them all
up. Hansel kept saying to Grethel, "We will soon find the way"; but they
did not, and they walked the whole night long and the next day, but
still they did not come out of the wood; and they got so hungry, for
they had nothing to eat but the berries which they found upon the
bushes. Soon they got so tired that they could not drag themselves
along, so they lay down under a tree and went to sleep.

It was now the third morning since they had left their father's house,
and they still walked on; but they only got deeper and deeper into the
wood, and Hansel saw that if help did not come very soon they would die
of hunger. At about noonday they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting
upon a bough, which sang so sweetly that they stood still and listened
to it. It soon ceased, and spreading its wings flew off; and they
followed it until it arrived at a cottage, upon the roof of which it
perched; and when they went close up to it they saw that the cottage was
made of bread and cakes, and the window-panes were of clear sugar.

"We will go in there," said Hansel, "and have a glorious feast. I will
eat a piece of the roof, and you can eat the window. Will they not be
sweet?" So Hansel reached up and broke a piece off the roof, in order to
see how it tasted, while Grethel stepped up to the window and began to
bite it. Then a sweet voice called out in the room, "Tip-tap, tip-tap,
who raps at my door?" and the children answered, "the wind, the wind,
the child of heaven"; and they went on eating without interruption.
Hansel thought the roof tasted very nice, so he tore off a great piece;
while Grethel broke a large round pane out of the window, and sat down
quite contentedly. Just then the door opened, and a very old woman,
walking upon crutches, came out. Hansel and Grethel were so frightened
that they let fall what they had in their hands; but the old woman,
nodding her head, said, "Ah, you dear children, what has brought you
here? Come in and stop with me, and no harm shall befall you"; and so
saying she took them both by the hand, and led them into her cottage. A
good meal of milk and pancakes, with sugar, apples, and nuts, was spread
on the table, and in the back room were two nice little beds, covered
with white, where Hansel and Grethel laid themselves down, and thought
themselves in heaven. The old woman behaved very kindly to them, but in
reality she was a wicked witch who waylaid children, and built the
bread-house in order to entice them in, but as soon as they were in her
power she killed them, cooked and ate them, and made a great festival of
the day. Witches have red eyes, and cannot see very far; but they have a
fine sense of smelling, like wild beasts, so that they know when
children approach them. When Hansel and Grethel came near the witch's
house she laughed wickedly, saying, "Here come two who shall not escape
me." And early in the morning, before they awoke, she went up to them,
and saw how lovingly they lay sleeping, with their chubby red cheeks,
and she mumbled to herself, "That will be a good bite." Then she took up
Hansel with her rough hands, and shut him up in a little cage with a
lattice-door; and although he screamed loudly it was of no use. Grethel
came next, and, shaking her till she awoke, the witch said, "Get up, you
lazy thing, and fetch some water to cook something good for your
brother, who must remain in that stall and get fat; when he is fat
enough I shall eat him." Grethel began to cry, but it was all useless,
for the old witch made her do as she wished. So a nice meal was cooked
for Hansel, but Grethel got nothing but a crab's claw.

Every morning the old witch came to the cage and said, "Hansel, stretch
out your finger that I may feel whether you are getting fat." But Hansel
used to stretch out a bone, and the old woman, having very bad sight,
thought it was his finger, and wondered very much that he did not get
fatter. When four weeks had passed, and Hansel still kept quite lean,
she lost all her patience, and would not wait any longer. "Grethel," she
called out in a passion, "get some water quickly; be Hansel fat or lean,
this morning I will kill and cook him." Oh, how the poor little sister
grieved, as she was forced to fetch the water, and fast the tears ran
down her cheeks! "Dear good God, help us now!" she exclaimed. "Had we
only been eaten by the wild beasts in the wood, then we should have died
together." But the old witch called out, "Leave off that noise; it will
not help you a bit."

So early in the morning Grethel was forced to go out and fill the
kettle, and make a fire. "First, we will bake, however," said the old
woman; "I have already heated the oven and kneaded the dough"; and so
saying, she pushed poor Grethel up to the oven, out of which the flames
were burning fiercely. "Creep in," said the witch, "and see if it is hot
enough, and then we will put in the bread"; but she intended when
Grethel got in to shut up the oven and let her bake, so that she might
eat her as well as Hansel. Grethel perceived what her thoughts were, and
said, "I do not know how to do it; how shall I get in?" "You stupid
goose," said she, "the opening is big enough. See, I could even get in
myself!" and she got up, and put her head into the oven. Then Grethel
gave her a push, so that she fell right in, and then shutting the iron
door she bolted it! Oh! how horribly she howled; but Grethel ran away,
and left the ungodly witch to burn to ashes.

Now she ran to Hansel, and, opening his door, called out, "Hansel, we
are saved; the old witch is dead!" So he sprang out, like a bird out of
his cage when the door is opened; and they were so glad that they fell
upon each other's neck, and kissed each other over and over again. And
now, as there was nothing to fear, they went into the witch's house,
where in every corner were caskets full of pearls and precious stones.
"These are better than pebbles," said Hansel, putting as many into his
pocket as it would hold; while Grethel thought, "I will take some too,"
and filled her apron full. "We must be off now," said Hansel, "and get
out of this enchanted forest." But when they had walked for two hours
they came to a large piece of water. "We cannot get over," said Hansel;
"I can see no bridge at all." "And there is no boat, either," said
Grethel; "but there swims a white duck, and I will ask her to help us
over." And she sang:

  "Little Duck, good little Duck,
    Grethel and Hansel, here we stand;
  There is neither stile nor bridge,
    Take us on your back to land."

So the duck came to them, and Hansel sat himself on, and bade his sister
sit behind him. "No," answered Grethel, "that will be too much for the
duck; she shall take us over one at a time." This the good little bird
did, and when both were happily arrived on the other side, and had gone
a little way, they came to a well-known wood, which they knew the better
every step they went, and at last they perceived their father's house.
Then they began to run, and, bursting into the house, they fell into
their father's arms. He had not had one happy hour since he had left the
children in the forest; and his wife was dead. Grethel shook her apron,
and the pearls and precious stones rolled out upon the floor, and Hansel
threw down one handful after the other out of his pocket. Then all their
sorrows were ended, and they lived together in great happiness.

My tale is done. There runs a mouse; whoever catches her may make a
great, great cap out of her fur.




OH, IF I COULD BUT SHIVER!


A father had two sons, the elder of whom was forward and clever enough
to do almost anything; but the younger was so stupid that he could learn
nothing, and when the people saw him they said, "Will thy father still
keep thee as a burden to him?" So, if anything was to be done, the elder
had at all times to do it; but sometimes the father would call him to
fetch something in the dead of night, and perhaps the way led through
the churchyard or by a dismal place, and then he used to answer, "No,
father, I cannot go there, I am afraid," for he was a coward. Or
sometimes of an evening, tales were told by the fireside which made one
shudder, and the listeners exclaimed, "Oh, it makes us shiver!" In a
corner, meanwhile, sat the younger son, listening, but he could not
comprehend what was said, and he thought, "They say continually, 'Oh, it
makes us shiver, it makes us shiver!' but perhaps shivering is an art
which I cannot understand." One day, however, his father said to him,
"Do you hear, you there in the corner? You are growing stout and big;
you must learn some trade to get your living by. Do you see how your
brother works? But as for you, you are not worth malt and hops."

"Ah, father," answered he, "I would willingly learn something. When
shall I begin? I want to know what shivering means, for of that I can
understand nothing."

The elder brother laughed when he heard this speech, and thought to
himself, "Ah! my brother is such a simpleton that he cannot earn his own
living. He who would make a good hedge must learn betimes to bend." But
the father sighed and said, "What shivering means you may learn soon
enough, but you will never get your bread by that."

Soon after the parish sexton came in for a gossip, so the father told
him his troubles, and how that his younger son was such a simpleton that
he knew nothing and could learn nothing. "Just fancy, when I asked him
how he intended to earn his bread, he desired to learn what shivering
meant!" "Oh, if that be all," answered the sexton, "he can learn that
soon enough with me; just send him to my place, and I will soon teach
him." The father was very glad, because he thought that it would do the
boy good; so the sexton took him home to ring the bells. About two days
afterward he called him up at midnight to go into the church-tower to
toll the bell. "You shall soon learn what shivering means," thought the
sexton, and getting up he went out too. As soon as the boy reached the
belfry, and turned himself round to seize the rope, he saw upon the
stairs, near the sounding-hole, a white figure. "Who's there?" he called
out; but the figure gave no answer, and neither stirred nor spoke.
"Answer," said the boy, "or make haste off; you have no business here
to-night." But the sexton did not stir, so that the boy might think it
was a ghost.

The boy called out a second time, "What are you doing here? Speak, if
you are an honest fellow, or else I will throw you downstairs."

The sexton said to himself, "That is not a bad thought"; but he remained
quiet as if he were a stone. Then the boy called out for the third time,
but it produced no effect; so, making a spring, he threw the ghost down
the stairs, so that it rolled ten steps, and then lay motionless in a
corner. Thereupon he rang the bell, and then going home, he went to bed
without saying a word, and fell fast asleep. The sexton's wife waited
some time for her husband, but he did not come; so at last she became
anxious, woke the boy, and asked him if he knew where her husband was,
who had gone before him to the belfry.

"No," answered the boy; "but there was someone standing on the steps who
would not give any answer, nor go away, so I took him for a thief and
threw him downstairs. Go now and see where he is; perhaps it may be he,
but I should be sorry for it." The wife ran off and found her husband
lying in a corner, groaning, with one of his ribs broken.

She took him up and ran with loud outcries to the boy's father, and said
to him, "Your son has brought a great misfortune on us; he has thrown my
husband down and broken his bones. Take the good-for-nothing fellow from
our house."

The terrified father came in haste and scolded the boy. "What do these
wicked tricks mean? They will only bring misfortune upon you."

"Father," answered the lad, "hear me! I am quite innocent. He stood
there at midnight like one who had done some evil; I did not know who it
was, and cried three times, 'Speak, or be off!'"

"Ah!" said the father, "everything goes badly with you. Get out of my
sight; I do not wish to see you again!"

"Yes, father, willingly; wait but one day, then I will go out and learn
what shivering means, that I may at least understand one business which
will support me."

"Learn what you will," replied the father, "all is the same to me. Here
are fifty dollars; go forth with them into the world, and tell no man
whence you came, or who your father is, for I am ashamed of you."

"Yes, father, as you wish; but if you desire nothing else, I shall
esteem that very lightly."

As soon as day broke the youth put his fifty dollars into a knapsack and
went out upon the high road, saying continually, "Oh, if I could but
shiver!"

Presently a man came up, who heard the boy talking to himself; and, as
they we're just passing the place where the gallows stood, the man said,
"Do you see? There is the tree where seven fellows have married the
hempen maid, and now swing to and fro. Sit yourself down there and wait
till midnight, and then you will know what it is to shiver!"

"Oh, if that be all," answered the boy, "I can very easily do that! But
if I learn so speedily what shivering is, then you shall have my fifty
dollars if you come again in the morning."

Then the boy went to the gallows, sat down, and waited for evening, and
as he felt cold he made a fire. But about midnight the wind blew so
sharp, that in spite of the fire he could not keep himself warm. The
wind blew the bodies against one another, so that they swung backward
and forward, and he thought, "If I am cold here below by the fire, how
must they freeze above!" So his compassion was excited, and, contriving
a ladder, he mounted, and, unloosening them one after another, he
brought down all seven. Then he poked and blew the fire, and set them
round that they might warm themselves; but as they sat still without
moving their clothing caught fire. So he said, "Take care of yourselves,
or I will hang all of you up again." The dead heard not, and silently
allowed their rags to burn. This made him so angry that he said, "If you
will not hear I cannot help you; but I will not burn with you." So he
hung them up again in a row, and sitting down by the fire he soon went
to sleep. The next morning the man came, expecting to receive his fifty
dollars, and asked, "Now do you know what shivering means?" "No," he
answered; "how should I know? Those fellows up there have not opened
their mouths, and were so stupid that they let the old rags on their
bodies be burnt." Then the man saw that he should not carry away the
fifty dollars that day, so he went away saying, "I never met with such a
one before."

The boy also went on his way and began again to say, "Ah, if only I
could but shiver--if I could but shiver!" A wagoner walking behind
overheard him, and asked, "Who are you?"

"I do not know," answered the boy.

The wagoner asked again, "What do you here?"

"I know not."

"Who is your father?"

"I dare not say."

"What is it you are continually grumbling about?"

"Oh," replied the youth, "I wish to learn what shivering is, but nobody
can teach me."

"Cease your silly talk," said the wagoner. "Come with me, and I will see
what I can do for you." So the boy went with the wagoner, and about
evening time they arrived at an inn where they put up for the night, and
while they were going into the parlor he said, quite aloud, "Oh, if I
could but shiver--if I could but shiver!" The host overheard him and
said, laughingly, "Oh, if that is all you wish, you shall soon have the
opportunity." "Hold your tongue," said his wife; "so many imprudent
people have already lost their lives, it were a shame and sin to such
beautiful eyes that they should not see the light again." But the youth
said, "If it were ever so difficult I would at once learn it; for that
reason I left home"; and he never let the host have any peace till he
told him that not far off stood an enchanted castle, where any one might
soon learn to shiver if he would watch there three nights. The King had
promised his daughter in marriage to whoever would venture, and she was
the most beautiful young lady that the sun ever shone upon. And he
further told him that inside the castle there was an immense amount of
treasure guarded by evil spirits; enough to make any one free, and turn
a poor man into a very rich one. Many, he added, had already ventured
into this castle, but no one had ever come out again.

The next morning this youth went to the King, and said, "If you will
allow me, I wish to watch three nights in the enchanted castle." The
King looked at him, and because his appearance pleased him, he said,
"You may make three requests, but they must be inanimate things you ask
for, and such as you can take with you into the castle." So the youth
asked for a fire, a lathe, and a cutting-board.

The King let him take these things by day into the castle, and when it
was evening the youth went in and made himself a bright fire in one of
the rooms, and, placing his cutting-board and knife near it, he sat down
upon his lathe. "Ah, if I could but shiver!" said he. "But even here I
shall never learn." At midnight he got up to stir the fire, and, as he
poked it, there shrieked suddenly in one corner, "Miau, miau! how cold I
am!" "You simpleton!" he exclaimed, "what are you shrieking for? If you
are so cold come and sit down by the fire and warm yourself!" As he was
speaking, two great black cats sprang up to him with an immense jump and
sat down one on each side, looking at him quite wildly with their fiery
eyes. When they had warmed themselves for a little while they said,
"Comrade, shall we have a game of cards?" "Certainly," he replied; "but
let me see your paws first." So they stretched out their claws, and he
said, "Ah, what long nails you have got; wait a bit, I must cut them off
first"; and so saying he caught them up by the necks, and put them on
his board and screwed their feet down. "Since I have seen what you are
about I have lost my relish for a game at cards," said he; and,
instantly killing them, threw them away into the water. But no sooner
had he quieted these two and thought of sitting down again by his fire,
than there came out of every hole and corner black cats and black dogs
with glowing chains, continually more and more, so that he could not
hide himself. They howled fearfully, and jumped upon his fire, and
scattered it about as if they would extinguish it. He looked on quietly
for some time, but at last, getting angry, he took up his knife and
called out, "Away with you, you vagabonds!" and chased them about until
a part ran off, and the rest he killed and threw into the pond. As soon
as he returned he blew up the sparks of his fire again and warmed
himself, and while he sat his eyes began to feel very heavy and he
wished to go to sleep. So looking around he saw a great bed in one
corner, in which he lay down; but no sooner had he closed his eyes, than
the bed began to move of itself and travelled all round the castle.
"Just so," said he, "only better still"; whereupon the bed galloped away
as if six horses pulled it up and down steps and stairs, until at last,
all at once, it overset, bottom upward, and lay upon him like a
mountain; but up he got, threw pillows and mattresses into the air, and
saying, "Now he who wishes may travel," laid himself down by the fire
and slept till day broke. In the morning the King came, and, seeing the
youth lying on the ground, he thought that the spectres had killed him,
and that he was dead; so he said, "It is a great misfortune that the
finest men are thus killed"; but the youth, hearing this, sprang up,
saying, "It is not come to that with me yet!" The King was much
astonished, but very glad, and asked him how he had fared. "Very well,"
replied he; "as one night has passed, so also may the other two." Soon
after he met his landlord, who opened his eyes when he saw him. "I never
thought to see you alive again," said he; "have you learnt now what
shivering means?" "No," said he; "it is all of no use. Oh, if any one
would but tell me!"

The second night he went up again into the castle, and sitting down by
the fire, began his old song, "If I could but shiver!" When midnight
came, a ringing and a rattling noise was heard, gentle at first and
louder and louder by degrees; then there was a pause, and presently with
a loud outcry half a man's body came down the chimney and fell at his
feet. "Holloa," he exclaimed; "only half a man answered that ringing;
that is too little." Then the ringing began afresh, and a roaring and
howling was heard, and the other half fell down. "Wait a bit," said he;
"I will poke up the fire first." When he had done so and looked round
again, the two pieces had joined themselves together, and an ugly man
was sitting in his place. "I did not bargain for that," said the youth;
"the bench is mine." The man tried to push him away, but the youth would
not let him, and giving him a violent push sat himself down in his old
place. Presently more men fell down the chimney, one after the other,
who brought nine thigh-bones and two skulls, which they set up, and then
they began to play at ninepins. At this the youth wished also to play,
so he asked whether he might join them. "Yes, if you have money!" "Money
enough," he replied, "but your balls are not quite round"; so saying he
took up the skulls, and, placing them on his lathe, turned them round.
"Ah, now you will roll well," said he. "Holloa! now we will go at it
merrily." So he played with them and lost some of his money, but as it
struck twelve everything disappeared. Then he lay down and went to sleep
quietly. On the morrow the King came for news, and asked him how he had
fared this time. "I have been playing ninepins," he replied, "and lost a
couple of dollars." "Have you not shivered?" "No! I have enjoyed myself
very much; but I wish some one would teach me that!"

On the third night he sat down again on his bench, saying in great
vexation, "Oh, if I could only shiver!" When it grew late, six tall men
came in bearing a coffin between them. "Ah, ah," said he, "that is
surely my little cousin, who died two days ago"; and beckoning with his
finger he called, "Come, little cousin, come!" The men set down the
coffin upon the ground, and he went up and took off the lid, and there
lay a dead man within, and as he felt the face it was as cold as ice.
"Stop a moment," he cried; "I will warm it in a trice"; and stepping up
to the fire he warmed his hands, and then laid them upon the face, but
it remained cold. So he took up the body, and sitting down by the fire,
he laid it on his lap and rubbed the arms that the blood might circulate
again. But all this was of no avail, and he thought to himself if two
lie in a bed together they warm each other; so he put the body in the
bed, and covering it up laid himself down by its side. After a little
while the body became warm and began to move about. "See, my cousin," he
exclaimed, "have I not warmed you?" But the body got up and exclaimed,
"Now I will strangle you." "Is that your gratitude?" cried the youth.
"Then you shall get into your coffin again"; and taking it up, he threw
the body in, and made the lid fast. Then the six men came in again and
bore it away. "Oh, deary me," said he, "I shall never be able to shiver
if I stop here all my lifetime!" At these words in came a man who was
taller than all the others, and looked more horrible; but he was very
old and had a long white beard. "Oh, you wretch," he exclaimed, "now
thou shalt learn what shivering means, for thou shalt die!"

"Not so quick," answered the youth; "if I die I must be brought to it
first."

"I will quickly seize you," replied the ugly one.

"Softly, softly; be not too sure. I am as strong as you, and perhaps
stronger."

"That we will see," said the ugly man. "If you are stronger than I, I
will let you go; come, let us try"; and he led him away through a dark
passage to a smith's forge. Then taking up an axe he cut through the
anvil at one blow down to the ground. "I can do that still better," said
the youth, and went to another anvil, while the old man followed him and
watched him, with his long beard hanging down. Then the youth took up an
axe, and, splitting the anvil at one blow, wedged the old man's beard in
it. "Now I have you; now death comes upon you!" and taking up an iron
bar he beat the old man until he groaned, and begged him to stop, and he
would give him great riches. So the youth drew out the axe, and let him
loose. Then the old man, leading him back into the castle, showed him
three chests full of gold in a cellar. "One share of this," said he,
"belongs to the poor, another to the King, and a third to yourself." And
just then it struck twelve and the old man vanished, leaving the youth
in the dark. "I must help myself out here," said he, and groping round
he found his way back to his room and went to sleep by the fire.

The next morning the King came and inquired, "Now have you learnt to
shiver?" "No," replied the youth; "what is it? My dead cousin came here,
and a bearded man, who showed me a lot of gold down below; but what
shivering means, no one has showed me!" Then the King said, "You have
won the castle, and shall marry my daughter."

"That is all very fine," replied the youth, "but still I don't know what
shivering means."

So the gold was fetched, and the wedding was celebrated, but the young
Prince (for the youth was a Prince now), notwithstanding his love for
his bride, and his great contentment, was still continually crying, "If
I could but shiver! if I could but shiver!" At last it fell out in this
wise: one of the chambermaids said to the Princess, "Let me bring in my
aid to teach him what shivering is." So she went to the brook which
flowed through the garden, and drew up a pail of water full of little
fish; and, at night, when the young Prince was asleep, his bride drew
away the covering and poured the pail of cold water and the little
fishes over him, so that they slipped all about him. Then the Prince
woke up directly, calling out, "Oh! that makes me shiver! dear wife,
that makes me shiver! Yes, now I know what shivering means!"




DUMMLING AND THE THREE FEATHERS


Once upon a time there lived a King who had three sons; the two elder
were learned and bright, but the youngest said very little and appeared
somewhat foolish, so he was always known as Dummling.

When the King grew old and feeble, feeling that he was nearing his end,
he wished to leave the crown to one of his three sons, but could not
decide to which. He thereupon settled that they should travel, and that
the one who could obtain the most splendid carpet should ascend the
throne when he died.

So that there could be no disagreement as to the way each one should go,
the King conducted them to the courtyard of the Palace, and there blew
three feathers, by turn, into the air, telling his sons to follow the
course that the three feathers took.

Then one of the feathers flew eastwards, another westwards, but the
third went straight up towards the sky, though it only sped a short
distance before falling to earth.

Therefore one son travelled towards the east, and the second went to the
west, both making fun of poor Dummling, who was obliged to stay where
his feather had fallen. Then Dummling, sitting down and feeling rather
miserable after his brothers had gone, looked about him, and noticed
that near to where his feather lay was a trap-door. On lifting this up
he perceived a flight of steps, down which he went. At the bottom was
another door, so he knocked upon it, and then heard a voice calling--

  "Maiden, fairest, come to me,
  Make haste to ope the door,
  A mortal surely you will see,
  From the world above is he,
  We'll help him from our store."

And then the door was flung open, and the young man found himself facing
a big toad sitting in the centre of a number of young toads. The big
toad addressed him, asking him what he wanted.

Dummling, though rather surprised when he saw the toads, and heard them
question him, being good-hearted replied politely--

"I am desirous to obtain the most splendid carpet in the world; just now
it would be extremely useful to me."

The toad who had just spoken, called to a young toad, saying--

  "Maiden, fairest, come to me,
  'Tis a mortal here you see;
  Let us speed all his desires,
  Giving him what he requires."

Immediately the young toad fetched a large box. This the old one opened,
and took out an exquisite carpet, of so beautiful a design, that it
certainly could have been manufactured nowhere upon the earth.

Taking it with grateful thanks, Dummling went up the flight of steps,
and was once more in the Palace courtyard.

The two elder brothers, being of the opinion that the youngest was so
foolish that he was of no account whatever in trying to obtain the
throne, for they did not think he would find anything at all, had said
to each other:

"It is not necessary for us to trouble much in looking for the carpet!"
so they took from the shoulders of the first peasant they came across a
coarse shawl, and this they carried to their father.

At the same time Dummling appeared with his beautiful carpet, which he
presented to the King, who was very much surprised, and said--

"By rights the throne should be for my youngest son."

But when the two brothers heard this, they gave the old King no rest,
saying--

"How is it possible that Dummling, who is not at all wise, could control
the affairs of an important kingdom? Make some other condition, we beg
of you!"

"Well," agreed the father, "the one who brings me the most magnificent
ring shall succeed to my throne," and once more he took his sons outside
the Palace. Then, again, he blew three feathers into the air to show the
direction each one should go; whereupon the two elder sons went east and
west, but Dummling's flew straight up, and fell close by the trap-door.
Then the youngest son descended the steps as before, and upon seeing the
large toad he talked with her, and told her what he desired. So the big
box was brought, and out of it the toad handed him a ring which was of
so exquisite a workmanship that no goldsmith's could equal it.

Meanwhile the two elder brothers made fun of the idea of Dummling
searching for a ring, and they decided to take no needless trouble
themselves.

Therefore, finding an old iron ring belonging to some harness, they took
that to the King. Dummling was there before them with his valuable ring,
and immediately upon his showing it, the father declared that in justice
the kingdom should be his.

In spite of this, however, the two elder sons worried the poor King into
appointing one test further, before bestowing his kingdom, and the King,
giving way, announced that the one who brought home the most beautiful
woman should inherit the crown.

Then Dummling again descended to the large toad and made known to her
that he wished to find the most beautiful woman alive.

"The most beautiful woman is not always at hand," said the toad,
"however, you shall have her."

Then she gave to him a scooped-out turnip to which half a dozen little
mice were attached. The young man regarded this a trifle despondently,
for it had no great resemblance to what he was seeking.

"What can I make of this?" he asked.

"Only place in it one of my young toads," replied the large toad, "and
then you can decide how to use it."

From the young toads around the old toad, the young man seized one at
hazard, and placed it in the scooped-out turnip, but hardly was it there
when the most astounding change occurred, for the toad was transformed
into a wondrously lovely maiden, the turnip became an elegant carriage,
and the six mice were turned into handsome horses. The young man kissed
the maiden and drove off to bring her to the King.

Not long afterwards the two brothers arrived.

In the same way, as the twice before, they had taken no trouble about
the matter, but had picked up the first passable looking peasant woman
whom they had happened to meet.

After glancing at the three, the King said: "Without doubt, at my death
the kingdom will be Dummling's."

Once more the brothers loudly expressed their discontent, and gave the
King no peace, declaring--

"It is impossible for us to agree to Dummling becoming ruler of the
kingdom," and they insisted that the women should be required to spring
through a hoop which was suspended from the ceiling in the centre of the
hall, thinking to themselves "Now, certainly our peasants will get the
best of it, they are active and sturdy, but that fragile lady will kill
herself if she jumps."

To this, again, the King consented, and the peasants were first given
trial.

They sprang through the hoop, indeed, but so clumsily that they fell,
breaking their arms and legs.

Upon which the lovely lady whom Dummling had brought home, leapt through
as lightly as a fawn, and this put an end to all contention.

So the crown came to Dummling, who lived long, and ruled his people
temperately and justly.




LITTLE SNOW WHITE


It was in the middle of winter, when the broad flakes of snow were
falling around, that a certain queen sat working at her window, the
frame of which was made of fine black ebony; and, as she was looking out
upon the snow, she pricked her finger, and three drops of blood fell
upon it. Then she gazed thoughtfully down on the red drops which
sprinkled the white snow and said, "Would that my little daughter may be
as white as that snow, as red as the blood, and as black as the ebony
window-frame!" And so the little girl grew up; her skin was a white as
snow, her cheeks as rosy as blood, and her hair as black as ebony; and
she was called Snow-White.

But this queen died; and the king soon married another wife, who was
very beautiful, but so proud that she could not bear to think that any
one could surpass her. She had a magical looking-glass, to which she
used to go and gaze upon herself in it, and say--

  "Tell me, glass, tell me true!
    Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest? tell me who?"

And the glass answered, "Thou, Queen, art fairest in the land"

But Snow-White grew more and more beautiful; and when she was seven
years old, she was as bright as the day, and fairer than the queen
herself. Then the glass one day answered queen, when she went to consult
it as usual--

  "Thou, Queen, may'st fair and beauteous be,
  But Snow-White is lovelier far than thee?"

When the queen heard this she turned pale with rage and envy; and
calling to one of her servants said, "Take Snow-White away into the wide
wood, that I may never see her more." Then the servant led the little
girl away; but his heart melted when she begged him to spare her life,
and he said, "I will not hurt thee, thou pretty child." So he left her
there alone; and though he thought it most likely that the wild beasts
would tear her to pieces, he felt as if a great weight were taken off
his heart when he had made up his mind not to kill her, but leave her to
her fate.

Then poor Snow-White wandered along through the wood in great fear; and
the wild beasts roared around, but none did her any harm. In the evening
she came to a little cottage, and went in there to rest, for her weary
feet would carry her no further. Everything was spruce and neat in the
cottage: on the table was spread a white cloth, and there were seven
little plates with seven little loaves and seven little glasses with
wine in them; and knives and forks laid in order, and by the wall stood
seven little beds. Then, as she was exceedingly hungry, she picked a
little piece off each loaf, and drank a very little wine out of each
glass; and after that she thought she would lie down and rest. So she
tried all the little beds; and one was too long, and another was too
short, till, at last, the seventh suited her; and there she laid herself
down and went to sleep. Presently in came the masters of the cottage,
who were seven little dwarfs that lived among the mountains, and dug and
searched about for gold. They lighted up their seven lamps, and saw
directly that all was not right. The first said, "Who has been sitting
on my stool?" The second, "Who has been eating off my plate?" The third,
"Who has been picking at my bread?" The fourth, "Who has been meddling
with my spoon?" The fifth, "Who has been handling my fork?" The sixth,
"Who has been cutting with my knife?" The seventh, "Who has been
drinking my wine?" Then the first looked around and said, "Who has been
lying on my bed?" And the rest came running to him, and every one cried
out that somebody had been upon his bed. But the seventh saw Snow-White,
and called upon his brethren to come and look at her; and they cried out
with wonder and astonishment, and brought their lamps and gazing upon
her, they said, "Good heavens! what a lovely child she is!" And they
were delighted to see her, and took care not to waken her; and the
seventh dwarf slept an hour with each of the other dwarfs in turn, till
the night was gone.

In the morning Snow-White told them all her story, and they pitied her,
and said if she would keep all things in order, and cook and wash, and
knit and spin for them, she might stay where she was, and they would
take good care of her. Then they went out all day long to their work,
seeking for gold and silver in the mountains; and Snow-White remained at
home; and they warned her, saying, "The queen will soon find out where
you are, so take care and let no one in." But the queen, now that she
thought Snow-White was dead, believed that she was certainly the
handsomest lady in the land; so she went to her glass and said--

  "Tell me, glass, tell me true!
    Of all the ladies in the land,
  Who is fairest? tell me who?"

And the glass answered--

  "Thou, Queen, thou are fairest in all this land;
  But over the Hills, in the greenwood shade,
  Where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made,
  There Snow-White is hiding; and she
  Is lovelier far, O Queen, than thee."

Then the queen was very much alarmed; for she knew that the glass always
spoke the truth, and she was sure that the servant had betrayed her. And
as she could not bear to think that any one lived who was more beautiful
than she was, she disguised herself as an old pedlar woman and went her
way over the hills to the place where the dwarfs dwelt. Then she knocked
at the door and cried, "Fine wares to sell!" Snow-White looked out of
the window, and said, "Good day, good woman; what have you to sell?"
"Good wares, fine wares," replied she; "laces and bobbins of all
colors." "I will let the old lady in; she seems to be a very good sort
of a body," thought Snow-White; so she ran down, and unbolted the door.
"Bless me!" said the woman, "how badly your stays are laced. Let me lace
them up with one of my nice new laces." Snow-White did not dream of any
mischief; so she stood up before the old woman who set to work so
nimbly, and pulled the lace so tightly that Snow-White lost her breath,
and fell down as if she were dead. "There's an end of all thy beauty,"
said the spiteful queen, and went away home.

In the evening the seven dwarfs returned; and I need not say how grieved
they were to see their faithful Snow-White stretched upon the ground
motionless, as if she were quite dead. However, they lifted her up, and
when they found what was the matter, they cut the lace; and in a little
time she began to breathe, and soon came to herself again. Then they
said, "The old woman was the queen; take care another time, and let no
one in when we are away."

When the queen got home, she went to her glass, and spoke to it, but to
her surprise it replied in the same words as before.

Then the blood ran cold in her heart with spite and malice to hear that
Snow-White still lived; and she dressed herself up again in a disguise,
but very different from the one she wore before, and took with her a
poisoned comb. When she reached the dwarfs' cottage, she knocked at the
door, and cried, "Fine wares to sell!" but Snow-White said, "I dare not
let any one in." Then the queen said, "Only look at my beautiful combs;"
and gave her the poisoned one. And it looked so pretty that the little
girl took it up and put it into her hair to try it; but the moment it
touched her head the poison was so powerful that she fell down
senseless. "There you may lie," said the queen, and went her way. But by
good luck the dwarfs returned very early that evening; and when they saw
Snow-White lying on the ground, they thought what had happened, and soon
found the poisoned comb. And when they took it away, she recovered, and
told them all that had passed; and they warned her once more not to open
the door to any one.

Meantime the queen went home to her glass, and trembled with rage when
she received exactly the same answer as before; and she said,
"Snow-White shall die, if it costs me my life." So she went secretly
into a chamber, and prepared a poisoned apple: the outside looked very
rosy and tempting, but whosoever tasted it was sure to die. Then she
dressed herself up as a peasant's wife, and travelled over the hills to
the dwarfs' cottage, and knocked at the door; but Snow-White put her
head out of the window, and said, "I dare not let any one in, for the
dwarfs have told me not to." "Do as you please," said the old woman,
"but at any rate take this pretty apple; I will make you a present of
it." "No," said Snow-White, "I dare not take it." "You silly girl!"
answered the other, "what are you afraid of? do you think it is
poisoned? Come! do you eat one part, and I will eat the other." Now the
apple was so prepared that one side was good, though the other side was
poisoned. Then Snow-White was very much tempted to taste, for the apple
looked exceedingly nice; and when she saw the old woman eat, she could
refrain no longer. But she had scarcely put the piece into her mouth
when she fell down dead upon the ground. "This time nothing will save
thee," said the queen; and she went home to her glass, and at last it
said--"Thou, Queen, art the fairest of all the fair." And then her
envious heart was glad, and as happy as such a heart could be.

When evening came, and the dwarfs returned home, they found Snow-White
lying on the ground; no breath passed her lips, and they were afraid
that she was quite dead. They lifted her up, and combed her hair, and
washed her face with wine and water; but all was in vain. So they laid
her down upon a bier, and all seven watched and bewailed her three whole
days; and then they proposed to bury her; but her cheeks were still
rosy, and her face looked just as it did while she was alive; so they
said, "We will never bury her in the cold ground." And they made a
coffin of glass so that they might still look at her, and wrote her name
upon it in golden letters, and that she was a king's daughter. Then the
coffin was placed upon the hill, and one of the dwarfs always sat by it
and watched. And the birds of the air came, too, and bemoaned
Snow-White. First of all came an owl, and then a raven, but at last came
a dove.

And thus Snow-White lay for a long, long time, and still only looked as
though she were asleep; for she was even now as white as snow, and as
red as blood, and as black as ebony. At last a prince came and called at
the dwarfs' house; and he saw Snow-White and read what was written in
golden letters. Then he offered the dwarfs money, and earnestly prayed
them to let him take her away; but they said, "We will not part with her
for all the gold in the world." At last, however, they had pity on him,
and gave him the coffin; but the moment he lifted it up to carry it home
with him, the piece of apple fell from between her lips, and Snow-White
awoke, and exclaimed, "Where am I!" And the prince answered, "Thou art
safe with me." Then he told her all that had happened, and said, "I love
you better than all the world; come with me to my father's palace, and
you shall be my wife." Snow-White consented, and went home with the
prince; and everything was prepared with great pomp and splendor for
their wedding.

To the feast was invited, among the rest, Snow-White's old enemy, the
queen; and as she was dressing herself in fine, rich clothes, she looked
in the glass and said, "Tell me, glass, tell me true! Of all the ladies
in the land, Who is fairest? tell me who?" And the glass answered,
"Thou, lady, art the loveliest _here_, I ween; But lovelier far is the
new-made queen."

When she heard this, the queen started with rage; but her envy and
curiosity were so great, that she could not help setting out to see the
bride. And when she arrived, and saw that it was no other than
Snow-White, whom she thought had been dead a long while, she choked with
passion, and fell ill and died; but Snow-White and the prince lived and
reigned happily over that land, many, many years.




CATHERINE AND FREDERICK


Once upon a time there was a youth named Frederick and a girl called
Catherine, who had married and lived together as a young couple. One day
Fred said, "I am now going into the fields, dear Catherine, and by the
time I return let there be something hot upon the table, for I shall be
hungry, and something to drink, too, for I shall be thirsty."

"Very well, dear Fred," said she, "go at once, and I will make all right
for you."

As soon, then, as dinner-time approached, she took down a sausage out of
the chimney, and putting it in a frying-pan with batter, set it over the
fire. Soon the sausage began to frizzle and spit while Catherine stood
by holding the handle of the pan and thinking; and among other things
she thought that while the sausage was getting ready she might go into
the cellar and draw some beer. So she took a can and went down into the
cellar to draw the beer, and while it ran into the can, she bethought
herself that perhaps the dog might steal the sausage out of the pan, and
so up the cellar stairs she ran, but too late, for the rogue had already
got the meat in his mouth and was sneaking off. Catherine, however,
pursued the dog for a long way over the fields, but the beast was
quicker than she, and would not let the sausage go, but bolted off at a
great rate. "Off is off!" said Catherine, and turned round, and being
very tired and hot, she went home slowly to cool herself. All this while
the beer was running out of the cask, for Catherine had forgotten to
turn the tap off, and so, as soon as the can was full, the liquor ran
over the floor of the cellar until it was all out. Catherine saw the
misfortune at the top of the steps. "My gracious!" she exclaimed; "what
shall I do that Fred may not find this out?" She considered for some
time till she remembered that a sack of fine malt yet remained from the
last brewing, in one corner, which she would fetch down and strew about
in the beer. "Yes," said she, "it was spared at the right time to be
useful to me now in my necessity"; and down she pulled the sack so
hastily that she overturned the can of beer for Fred, and away it mixed
with the rest on the floor. "It is all right," said she, "where one is,
the other should be," and she strewed the malt over the whole cellar.
When it was done she was quite overjoyed at her work, and said, "How
clean and neat it does look, to be sure!"

At noontime Fred returned. "Now, wife, what have you ready for me?" said
he. "Ah, my dear Fred," she replied, "I would have fried you a sausage,
but while I drew the beer the dog stole it out of the pan, and while I
hunted the dog the beer all ran out, and as I was about to dry up the
beer with the malt I overturned your can; but be contented, the cellar
is quite dry again now."

"Oh, Catherine, Catherine!" said Fred; "you should not have done so! to
let the sausage be stolen! and the beer run out! and over all to shoot
our best sack of malt!"

"Well, Fred," said she, "I did not know that; you should have told me."

But the husband thought to himself, if one's wife acts so, one must look
after things oneself. Now, he had collected a tolerable sum of silver
dollars, which he changed into gold, and then he told his wife, "Do you
see, these are yellow counters which I will put in a pot and bury in the
stable under the cow's stall; but mind that you do not meddle with it,
or you will come to some harm."

Catherine promised to mind what he said, but as soon as Fred was gone
some hawkers came into the village with earthenware for sale, and
amongst others they asked her if she would purchase anything. "Ah, good
people," said Catherine, "I have no money, and cannot buy anything, but
if you can make use of yellow counters I will buy them."

"Yellow counters! ah! why not? Let us look at them," said they.

"Go into the stable," she replied, "and dig under the cows stall, and
there you will find the yellow counters. I dare not go myself."

The rogues went at once, and soon dug up the shining gold which they
quickly pocketed, and then they ran off, leaving behind them their pots
and dishes in the house. Catherine thought she might as well make use of
the new pottery, and since she had no need of anything in the kitchen,
she set out each pot on the ground, and then put others on the top of
the palings round the house for ornament. When Fred returned, and saw
the fresh decorations, he asked Catherine what she had done. "I have
bought them, Fred," said she, "with the yellow counters which lay under
the cow's stall; but I did not dig them up myself; the pedlars did
that."

"Ah, wife, what have you done?" replied Fred. "They were not counters,
but bright gold, which was all the property we possessed: you should not
have done so."

"Well, dear Fred," replied his wife, "you should have told me so before.
I did not know that."

Catherine stood considering for awhile, and presently she began, "Come,
Fred, we will soon get the gold back again; let us pursue the thieves."

"Well, come along," said Fred; "we will try at all events; but take
butter and cheese with you, that we may have something to eat on our
journey."

"Yes, Fred," said she, and soon made herself ready; but, her husband
being a good walker, she lagged behind. "Ah!" said she, "this is my
luck, for when we turn back I shall be a good bit forward." Presently
she came to a hill, on both sides of which there were very deep ruts.
"Oh, see!" said she, "how the poor earth is torn, flayed, and wounded;
it will never be well again all its life!" And out of compassion she
took out her butter, and greased the ruts over right and left, so that
the wheels might run more easily through them, and, while she stooped in
doing this, a cheese rolled out of her pocket down the mountain.
Catherine said when she saw it, "I have already once made the journey
up, and I am not coming down after you: another shall run and fetch
you." So saying, she took another cheese out of her pocket and rolled it
down; but as it did not return, she thought, "Perhaps they are waiting
for a companion and don't like to come alone"; and down she bowled a
third cheese. Still all three stayed, and she said, "I cannot think what
this means; perhaps it is that the third cheese has missed his way: I
will send a fourth, that he may call him as he goes by." But this one
acted no better than the others, and Catherine became so anxious that
she threw down a fifth and a sixth cheese also, and they were the last.
For a long time after this she waited, expecting they would come, but
when she found they did not she cried out, "You are nice fellows to send
after a dead man! you stop a fine time! but do you think I shall wait
for you? Oh, no! I shall go on; you can follow me; you have younger legs
than I."

So saying, Catherine walked on and came up with Fred, who was waiting
for her, because he needed something to eat. "Now," said he, "give me
quickly what you brought." She handed him the dry bread. "Where are the
butter and cheese?" cried her husband. "Oh, Fred, dear," she replied,
"with the butter I have smeared the ruts, and the cheeses will soon
come, but one ran away, and I sent the others after it to call it back!"

"It was silly of you to do so," said Fred, "to grease the roads with
butter, and to roll cheese down the hill!"

"If you had but told me so," said Catherine, vexedly.

So they ate the dry bread together, and presently Fred said, "Catherine,
did you make things fast at home before you came out?"

"No, Fred," said she, "you did not tell me."

"Then go back and lock up the house before we go farther; bring
something to eat with you, and I will stop here for you."

Back went Catherine, thinking, "Ah! Fred will like something else to
eat. Butter and cheese will not please; I will bring with me a bag of
dried apples and a mug of vinegar to drink." When she had put these
things together she bolted the upper half of the door, but the under
door she raised up and carried away on her shoulder, thinking that
certainly the house was well protected if she took such good care of the
door! Catherine walked along now very leisurely, for, said she to
herself, "Fred will have all the longer rest!" and as soon as she
reached him she gave him the door, saying, "There, Fred, now you have
the house door you can take care of the house yourself."

"Oh! my goodness," exclaimed the husband, "what a clever wife I have!
She has bolted the top door, but brought away the bottom part, where any
one can creep through! Now it is too late to go back to the house, but
since you brought the door here you may carry it onward."

"The door I will willingly carry," replied Catherine, "but the apples
and the vinegar will be too heavy, so I shall hang them on the door and
make that carry them!"

Soon after they came into a wood and looked about for the thieves, but
they, could not find them, and when it became dark they climbed up into
a tree to pass the night. But scarcely had they done this when up came
the fellows who carried away what should not go with them, and find
things before they are lost. They laid themselves down right under the
tree upon which Fred and Catherine were, and making a fire, prepared to
share their booty. Then Fred slipped down on the other side, and
collected stones, with which he climbed the tree again, to beat the
thieves with. The stones, however, did them no harm, for the fellows
called out, "Ah! it will soon be morning, for the wind is shaking down
the chestnuts." All this while Catherine still had the door upon her
shoulder, and, as it pressed very heavily, she thought the dried apples
were in fault, and said to Fred, "I must throw down these apples." "No,
Catherine," said he, "not now, they might discover us." "Ah, I must,
though, they are so heavy."

"Well, then, do it in the hangman's name!" cried Fred.

As they fell down the rogues said, "Ah! the birds are pulling off the
leaves."

A little while after Catherine said again, "Oh! Fred, I must pour out
the vinegar, it is so heavy."

"No, no!" said he, "it will discover us."

"Ah! but I must, Fred, it is very heavy," said Catherine.

"Well, then, do it in the hangman's name!" cried Fred.

So she poured out the vinegar, and as it dropped on them the thieves
said, "Ah! the dew is beginning to fall."

Not many minutes after Catherine found the door was still quite as
heavy, and said again to Fred, "Now I must throw down this door."

"No, Catherine," said he, "that would certainly discover us."

"Ah! Fred, but I must; it presses me so terribly."

"No, Catherine dear! do hold it fast," said Fred.

"There--it is gone!" said she.

"Then let it go in the hangman's name!" cried Fred, while it fell
crashing through the branches. The rogues below thought the Evil One was
descending the tree, and ran off, leaving everything behind them. And
early in the morning Fred and his wife descended, and found all their
gold under the tree.

As soon as they got home again, Fred said, "Now, Catherine, you must be
very industrious and work hard."

"Yes, my dear husband," said she; "I will go into the fields to cut
corn." When she was come into the field she said to herself, "Shall I
eat before I cut, or sleep first before I cut?" She determined to eat,
and soon became so sleepy over her meal that when she began to cut she
knew not what she was doing, and cut off half her clothes--gown,
petticoat and all. When, after a long sleep, Catherine awoke, she got up
half-stripped, and said to herself, "Am I myself? or am I not? Ah! I am
not myself." By and by night came on, and Catherine ran into the
village, and, knocking at her husband's window, called, "Fred!"

"What is the matter?" cried he.

"I want to know if Catherine is indoors!" said she.

"Yes, yes!" answered Fred, "she is certainly within, fast asleep."

"Then I am at home," said she, and ran away.

Standing outside Catherine found some thieves, wanting to steal, and
going up to them she said, "I will help you."

At this the thieves were very glad, not doubting but that she knew where
to light on what they sought. But Catherine, stepping in front of the
houses, called out, "Good people, what have you that we can steal?" At
this the thieves said, "You will do for us with a vengeance!" and they
wished they had never come near her; but in order to rid themselves of
her they said, "Just before the village the parson has some roots lying
in his field; go and fetch some."

Catherine went as she was bid, and began to grub for them, and soon made
herself very dirty with the earth. Presently a man came by and saw her,
and stood still, for he thought it was the Evil One who was grovelling
so among the roots. Away he ran into the village to the parson, and told
him the Evil One was in his field, rooting up the turnips. "Ah!
heavens!" said the parson, "I have a lame foot, and I cannot go out to
exorcize him."

"Then I will carry you a-pickaback," said the man, and took him up.

Just as they arrived in the field, Catherine got up and drew herself up
to her full height.

"Oh! it is the Evil One!" cried the parson, and both he and the man
hurried away; and, behold! the parson ran faster with his lame legs,
through fear and terror, than the countryman could with his sound legs!




THE VALIANT LITTLE TAILOR


One fine day a Tailor was sitting on his bench by the window in very
high spirits, sewing away most diligently, and presently up the street
came a country woman, crying, "Good jams for sale! Good jams for sale!"
This cry sounded nice in the Tailor's ears, and, poking his diminutive
head out of the window, he called, "Here, my good woman, just bring your
jams in here!" The woman mounted the three steps up to the Tailor's
house with her large basket, and began to open all the pots together
before him. He looked at them all, held them up to the light, smelt
them, and at last said, "These jams seem to me to be very nice, so you
may weigh me out two ounces, my good woman; I don't object even if you
make it a quarter of a pound." The woman, who hoped to have met with a
good customer, gave him all he wished, and went off grumbling, and in a
very bad temper.

"Now!" exclaimed the Tailor, "Heaven will send me a blessing on this
jam, and give me fresh strength and vigor;" and, taking the bread from
the cupboard, he cut himself a slice the size of the whole loaf, and
spread the jam upon it. "That will taste very nice," said he; "but,
before I take a bite, I will just finish this waistcoat." So he put the
bread on the table and stitched away, making larger and larger stitches
every time for joy. Meanwhile the smell of the jam rose to the ceiling,
where many flies were sitting, and enticed them down, so that soon a
great swarm of them had pitched on the bread. "Holloa! who asked you?"
exclaimed the Tailor, driving away the uninvited visitors; but the
flies, not understanding his words, would not be driven off, and came
back in greater numbers than before. This put the little man in a great
passion, and, snatching up in his anger a bag of cloth, he brought it
down with a merciless swoop upon them. When he raised it again he
counted as many as seven lying dead before him with outstretched legs.
"What a fellow you are!" said he to himself, astonished at his own
bravery. "The whole town must hear of this." In great haste he cut
himself out a band, hemmed it, and then put on it in large letters,
"SEVEN AT ONE BLOW!" "Ah," said he, "not one city alone, the whole world
shall hear it!" and his heart danced with joy, like a puppy-dog's tail.

The little Tailor bound the belt around his body, and made ready to
travel forth into the wide world, feeling the workshop too small for his
great deeds. Before he set out, however, he looked about his house to
see if there were anything he could carry with him, but he found only an
old cheese, which he pocketed, and observing a bird which was caught in
the bushes before the door, he captured it, and put that in his pocket
also. Soon after he set out boldly on his travels; and, as he was light
and active, he felt no fatigue. His road led him up a hill, and when he
arrived at the highest point of it he found a great Giant sitting there,
who was gazing about him very composedly.

But the little Tailor went boldly up, and said, "Good day, friend; truly
you sit there and see the whole world stretched below you. I also am on
my way thither to seek my fortune. Are you willing to go with me?"

The Giant looked with scorn at the little Tailor, and said, "You rascal!
you wretched creature!"

"Perhaps so," replied the Tailor; "but here may be seen what sort of a
man I am;" and, unbuttoning his coat, he showed the Giant his belt. The
Giant read, "SEVEN AT ONE BLOW"; and supposing they were men whom the
Tailor had killed, he felt some respect for him. Still he meant to try
him first; so taking up a pebble, he squeezed it so hard that water
dropped out of it. "Do as well as that," said he to the other, "if you
have the strength."

"If it be nothing harder than that," said the Tailor, "that's child's
play." And, diving into his pocket, he pulled out the cheese and
squeezed it till the whey ran out of it, and said, "Now, I fancy that I
have done better than you."

The Giant wondered what to say, and could not believe it of the little
man; so, catching up another pebble, he flung it so high that it almost
went out of sight, saying, "There, you pigmy, do that if you can."

"Well done," said the Tailor; "but your pebble will fall down again to
the ground. I will throw one up which will not come down;" and, dipping
into his pocket, he took out the bird and threw it into the air. The
bird, glad to be free, flew straight up, and then far away, and did not
come back. "How does that little performance please you, friend?" asked
the Tailor.

"You can throw well," replied the giant; "now truly we will see if you
are able to carry something uncommon." So saying, he took him to a large
oak tree, which lay upon the ground, and said, "If you are strong
enough, now help me to carry this tree out of the forest."

"With pleasure," replied the Tailor; "you may hold the trunk upon your
shoulder, and I will lift the boughs and branches, they are the
heaviest, and carry them."

The Giant took the trunk upon his shoulder, but the Tailor sat down on
one of the branches, and the Giant, who could not look round, was
compelled to carry the whole tree and the Tailor also. He being behind,
was very cheerful, and laughed at the trick, and presently began to sing
the song, "There rode three tailors out at the gate," as if the carrying
of trees were a trifle. The Giant, after he had staggered a very short
distance with his heavy load, could go no further, and called out, "Do
you hear? I must drop the tree." The Tailor, jumping down, quickly
embraced the tree with both arms, as if he had been carrying it, and
said to the Giant, "Are you such a big fellow, and yet cannot you carry
a tree by yourself?"

Then they travelled on further, and as they came to a cherry-tree, the
Giant seized the top of the tree where the ripest cherries hung, and,
bending it down, gave it to the Tailor to hold, telling him to eat. But
the Tailor was far too weak to hold the tree down, and when the Giant
let go, the tree flew up in the air, and the Tailor was taken with it.
He came down on the other side, however, unhurt, and the Giant said,
"What does that mean? Are you not strong enough to hold that twig?" "My
strength did not fail me," said the Tailor; "do you imagine that that
was a hard task for one who has slain seven at one blow? I sprang over
the tree simply because the hunters were shooting down here in the
thicket. Jump after me if you can." The Giant made the attempt, but
could not clear the tree, and stuck fast in the branches; so that in
this affair, too, the Tailor had the advantage.

Then the Giant said, "Since you are such a brave fellow, come with me to
my house, and stop a night with me." The Tailor agreed, and followed
him; and when they came to the cave, there sat by the fire two other
Giants, each with a roast sheep in his hand, of which he was eating. The
Tailor sat down thinking. "Ah, this is very much more like the world
than is my workshop." And soon the Giant pointed out a bed where he
could lie down and go to sleep. The bed, however, was too large for him,
so he crept out of it, and lay down in a corner. When midnight came, and
the Giant fancied the Tailor would be in a sound sleep, he got up, and
taking a heavy iron bar, beat the bed right through at one stroke, and
believed he had thereby given the Tailor his death-blow. At the dawn of
day the Giants went out into the forest, quite forgetting the Tailor,
when presently up he came, quite cheerful, and showed himself before
them. The Giants were frightened, and, dreading he might kill them all,
they ran away in a great hurry.

The Tailor travelled on, always following his nose, and after he had
journeyed some long distance, he came into the courtyard of a royal
palace; and feeling very tired he laid himself down on the ground and
went to sleep. Whilst he lay there the people came and viewed him on all
sides, and read upon his belt, "Seven at one blow." "Ah," they said,
"what does this great warrior here in time of peace? This must be some
valiant hero." So they went and told the King, knowing that, should war
break out, here was a valuable and useful man, whom one ought not to
part with at any price. The King took advice, and sent one of his
courtiers to the Tailor to beg for his fighting services, if he should
be awake. The messenger stopped at the sleeper's side, and waited till
he stretched out his limbs and unclosed his eyes, and then he mentioned
to him his message. "Solely for that reason did I come here," was his
answer; "I am quite willing to enter into the King's service." Then he
was taken away with great honor, and a fine house was appointed him to
dwell in.

The courtiers, however, became jealous of the Tailor, and wished him at
the other end of the world. "What will happen?" said they to one
another. "If we go to war with him, when he strikes out seven will fall
at one stroke, and nothing will be left for us to do." In their anger
they came to the determination to resign, and they went all together to
the King, and asked his permission, saying, "We are not prepared to keep
company with a man who kills seven at one blow." The King was sorry to
lose all his devoted servants for the sake of one, and wished that he
had never seen the Tailor, and would gladly have now been rid of him. He
dared not, however dismiss him, because he feared the Tailor might kill
him and all his subjects, and seat himself upon the throne. For a long
time he deliberated, till finally he came to a decision; and, sending
for the Tailor, he told him that, seeing he was so great a hero, he
wished to beg a favor of him. "In a certain forest in my kingdom," said
the King, "there are two Giants, who, by murder, rapine, fire, and
robbery, have committed great damage, and no one approaches them without
endangering his own life. If you overcome and slay both these Giants, I
will give you my only daughter in marriage, and half of my kingdom for a
dowry: a hundred knights shall accompany you, too, in order to render
you assistance."

"Ah, that is something for a man like me," thought the Tailor to
himself: "a lovely Princess and half a kingdom are not offered to one
every day." "Oh, yes," he replied, "I will soon settle these two Giants,
and a hundred horsemen are not needed for that purpose; he who kills
seven at one blow has no fear of two."

Speaking thus, the little Tailor set out, followed by the hundred
knights, to whom he said, immediately they came to the edge of the
forest, "You must stay here; I prefer to meet these Giants alone."

Then he ran off into the forest, peering about him on all sides; and
after a while he saw the two Giants sound asleep under a tree, snoring
so loudly that the branches above them shook violently. The Tailor, bold
as a lion, filled both his pockets with stones and climbed up the tree.
When he got to the middle of it he crawled along a bough, so that he sat
just above the sleepers, and then he let fall one stone after another
upon the body of one of them. For some time the Giant did not move,
until, at last awaking, he pushed his companion, and said, "Why are you
hitting me?"

"You have been dreaming," he answered; "I did not touch you." So they
laid themselves down again to sleep, and presently the Tailor threw a
stone down upon the other. "What is that?" he cried. "Why are you
knocking me about?"

"I did not touch you; you are dreaming," said the first. So they argued
for a few minutes; but, both being very weary with the day's work, they
soon went to sleep again. Then the Tailor began his fun again, and,
picking out the largest stone, threw it with all his strength upon the
chest of the first Giant. "This is too bad!" he exclaimed; and, jumping
up like a madman, he fell upon his companion, who considered himself
equally injured, and they set to in such good earnest, that they rooted
up trees and beat one another about until they both fell dead upon the
ground. Then the Tailor jumped down, saying, "What a piece of luck they
did not pull up the tree on which I sat, or else I must have jumped on
another like a squirrel, for I am not used to flying." Then he drew his
sword, and, cutting a deep wound in the breast of both, he went to the
horsemen and said, "The deed is done; I have given each his
death-stroke; but it was a tough job, for in their defence they uprooted
trees to protect themselves with; still, all that is of no use when such
an one as I come, who slew seven at one stroke."

"And are you not wounded?" they asked.

"How can you ask me that? they have not injured a hair of my head,"
replied the little man. The knights could hardly believe him, till,
riding into the forest, they found the Giants lying dead, and the
uprooted trees around them.

Then the Tailor demanded the promised reward of the King; but he
repented of his promise, and began to think of some new plan to shake
off the hero. "Before you receive my daughter and the half of my
kingdom," said he to him, "you must execute another brave deed. In the
forest there lives a unicorn that commits great damage, you must first
catch him."

"I fear a unicorn less than I did two Giants! Seven at one blow is my
motto," said the Tailor. So he carried with him a rope and an axe and
went off to the forest, ordering those, who were told to accompany him,
to wait on the outskirts. He had not to hunt long, for soon the unicorn
approached, and prepared to rush at him as if it would pierce him on the
spot. "Steady! steady!" he exclaimed, "that is not done so easily"; and,
waiting till the animal was close upon him, he sprang nimbly behind a
tree. The unicorn, rushing with all its force against the tree, stuck
its horn so fast in the trunk that it could not pull it out again, and
so it remained prisoner.

"Now I have got him," said the Tailor; and coming from behind the tree,
he first bound the rope around its neck, and then cutting the horn out
of the tree with his axe, he arranged everything, and, leading the
unicorn, brought it before the King.

The King, however, would not yet deliver over the promised reward, and
made a third demand, that, before the marriage, the Tailor should
capture a wild boar which did much damage, and he should have the
huntsmen to help him. "With pleasure," was the reply; "it is a mere
nothing." The huntsmen, however, he left behind, to their great joy, for
this wild boar had already so often hunted them, that they saw no fun in
now hunting it. As soon as the boar perceived the Tailor, it ran at him
with gaping mouth and glistening teeth, and tried to throw him down on
the ground; but our flying hero sprang into a little chapel which stood
near, and out again at a window, on the other side, in a moment. The
boar ran after him, but he, skipping around, closed the door behind it,
and there the furious beast was caught, for it was much too unwieldy and
heavy to jump out of the window.

The Tailor now ordered the huntsmen up, that they might see his prisoner
with their own eyes; but our hero presented himself before the King, who
was obliged at last, whether he would or no, to keep his word, and
surrender his daughter and the half of his kingdom.

If he had known that it was no warrior, but only a Tailor, who stood
before him, it would have grieved him still more.

So the wedding was celebrated with great magnificence, though with
little rejoicing, and out of a Tailor there was made a King.

A short time afterwards the young Queen heard her husband talking in his
sleep, saying, "Boy, make me a coat, and then stitch up these trowsers,
or I will lay the yard-measure over your shoulders!" Then she understood
of what condition her husband was, and complained in the morning to her
father, and begged he would free her from her husband, who was nothing
more than a tailor. The King comforted her by saying, "This night leave
your chamber-door open: my servants shall stand outside, and when he is
asleep they shall come in, bind him, and carry him away to a ship, which
shall take him out into the wide world." The wife was pleased with the
proposal; but the King's armor-bearer, who had overheard all, went to
the young King and revealed the whole plot. "I will soon put an end to
this affair," said the valiant little Tailor. In the evening at their
usual time they went to bed, and when his wife thought he slept she got
up, opened the door, and laid herself down again.

The Tailor, however, only pretended to be asleep, and began to call out
in a loud voice, "Boy, make me a coat, and then stitch up these
trowsers, or I will lay the yard-measure about your shoulders. Seven
have I slain with one blow, two Giants have I killed, a unicorn have I
led captive, and a wild boar have I caught, and shall I be afraid of
those who stand outside my room?"

When the men heard these words spoken by the Tailor, a great fear came
over them, and they ran away as if wild huntsmen were following them;
neither afterwards dared any man venture to oppose him. Thus the Tailor
became a King, and so he lived for the rest of his life.




LITTLE RED CAP


Many years ago there lived a dear little girl who was beloved by every
one who knew her; but her grand-mother was so very fond of her that she
never felt she could think and do enough to please this dear
grand-daughter, and she presented the little girl with a red silk cap,
which suited her so well, that she would never wear anything else, and
so was called Little Red-Cap.

One day Red-Cap's mother said to her, "Come, Red-Cap, here is a nice
piece of meat, and a bottle of wine: take these to your grandmother; she
is weak and ailing, and they will do her good. Be there before she gets
up; go quietly and carefully."

The grandmother lived far away in the wood, a long walk from the
village, and as Little Red-Cap came among the trees she met a Wolf; but
she did not know what a wicked animal it was, and so she was not at all
frightened. "Good morning, Little Red-Cap," he said.

"Thank you, Mr. Wolf," said she.

"Where are you going so early, Little Red-Cap?"

"To my grandmother's," she answered.

"And what are you carrying in that basket?"

"Some wine and meat," she replied. "We baked the meat yesterday, so that
grandmother, who is very weak, might have a nice strengthening meal."

"And where does your grandmother live?" asked the Wolf.

"Oh, quite twenty minutes walk further in the forest. The cottage stands
under three great oak trees; and close by are some nut bushes, by which
you will at once know it."

The Wolf was thinking to himself, "She is a nice tender thing, and will
taste better than the old woman; I must act cleverly, that I may make a
meal of both."

[Illustration: THE VALIANT LITTLE TAILOR.]

Presently he came up again to Little Red-Cap, and said, "Just look at
the beautiful flowers which grow around you; why do you not look about
you? I believe you don't hear how sweetly the birds are singing. You
walk as if you were going to school; see how cheerful everything is
about you in the forest."

And Little Red-Cap opened her eyes; and when she saw how the sunbeams
glanced and danced through the trees, and what bright flowers were
blooming in her path, she thought, "If I take my grandmother a fresh
nosegay, she will be very much pleased; and it is so very early that I
can, even then, get there in good time;" and running into the forest,
she looked about for flowers. But when she had once begun she did not
know how to leave off, and kept going deeper and deeper amongst the
trees looking for some still more beautiful flower. The Wolf, however,
ran straight to the house of the old grandmother, and knocked at the
door.

"Who's there?" asked the old lady.

"Only Little Red-Cap, bringing you some meat and wine; please open the
door," answered the Wolf. "Lift up the latch," cried the grandmother; "I
am much too ill to get up myself."

So the Wolf lifted the latch, and the door flew open; and without a
word, he jumped on to the bed, and gobbled up the poor old lady. Then he
put on her clothes, and tied her night-cap over his head; got into the
bed, and drew the blankets over him. All this time Red-Cap was gathering
flowers; and when she had picked as many as she could carry, she thought
of her grandmother, and hurried to the cottage. She wondered greatly to
find the door open; and when she got into the room, she began to feel
very ill, and exclaimed, "How sad I feel! I wish I had not come to-day."
Then she said, "Good morning," but received no reply; so she went up to
the bed, and drew back the curtains, and there lay her grandmother, as
she imagined, with the cap drawn half over her eyes, and looking very
fierce.

"Oh, grandmother, what great ears you have!" she said.

"All the better to hear you with," was the reply.

"And what great eyes you have!"

"All the better to see you with."

"And what great hands you have!"

"All the better to touch you with."

"But, grandmother, what very great teeth you have!"

"All the better to eat you with;" and hardly were the words spoken when
the Wolf made a jump out of bed, and swallowed up poor Little Red-Cap
also.

As soon as the Wolf had thus satisfied his hunger, he laid himself down
again on the bed, and went to sleep and snored very loudly. A huntsman
passing by overheard him, and said, "How loudly that old woman snores! I
must see if anything is the matter."

So he went into the cottage; and when he came to the bed, he saw the
Wolf sleeping in it. "What! are you here, you old rascal? I have been
looking for you," exclaimed he; and taking up his gun, he shot the old
Wolf through the head.

But it is also said that the story ends in a different manner; for that
one day, when Red-Cap was taking some presents to her grandmother, a
Wolf met her, and wanted to mislead her; but she went straight on, and
told her grandmother that she had met a Wolf, who said good day, and who
looked so hungrily out of his great eyes, as if he would have eaten her
up had she not been on the high-road.

So her grandmother said, "We will shut the door, and then he cannot get
in." Soon after, up came the Wolf, who tapped, and exclaimed, "I am
Little Red-Cap, grandmother; I have some roast meat for you." But they
kept quite quiet, and did not open the door; so the Wolf, after looking
several times round the house, at last jumped on the roof, thinking to
wait till Red-Cap went home in the evening, and then to creep after her
and eat her in the darkness. The old woman, however, saw what the
villain intended. There stood before the door a large stone trough, and
she said to Little Red-Cap, "Take this bucket, dear: yesterday I boiled
some meat in this water, now pour it into the stone trough." Then the
Wolf sniffed the smell of the meat, and his mouth watered, and he wished
very much to taste. At last he stretched his neck too far over, so that
he lost his balance, and fell down from the roof, right into the great
trough below, and there he was drowned.




THE GOLDEN GOOSE


There was once a man who had three sons. The youngest was called
Dummerly, and was on all occasions scorned and ill-treated by the whole
family. It happened that the eldest took it into his head one day to go
into the forest to cut wood; and his mother gave him a delicious meat
pie and a bottle of wine to take with him, that he might sustain himself
at his work. As he went into the forest, a little old man bid him good
day, and said, "Give me a little bit of meat from your plate, and a
little wine out of your flask; I am very hungry and thirsty." But this
clever young man said, "Give you my meat and wine! No, I thank you;
there would not be enough left for me;" and he went on his way. He soon
began to chop down a tree; but he had not worked long before he missed
his stroke, and cut himself, and was obliged to go home and have the
wound bound up. Now, it was the little old man who caused him this
mischief.

Next the second son went out to work; and his mother gave him, too, a
meat pie and a bottle of wine. And the same little old man encountered
him also, and begged him for something to eat and drink. But he, too,
thought himself extremely clever, and said, "Whatever you get, I shall
be without; so go your way!" The little man made sure that he should
have his reward; and the second stroke that he struck at a tree, hit him
on the leg, so that he too was compelled to go home.

Then Dummerly said, "Father, I should like to go and cut fuel too." But
his father replied, "Your brothers have both maimed themselves; you had
better stop at home, for you know nothing of the job." But Dummerly was
very urgent; and at last his father said, "Go your way; you will be
wiser when you have suffered for your foolishness." And his mother gave
him only some dry bread, and a bottle of sour ale; but when he went into
the forest, he met the little old man, who said, "Give me some meat and
drink, for I am very hungry and thirsty." Dummerly said, "I have nothing
but dry bread and sour beer; if that will do for you, we will sit down
and eat it together." So they sat down, and when the lad took out his
bread, behold it was turned into a splendid meat pie, and his sour beer
became delicious wine! They ate and drank heartily, and when they had
finished, the little man said, "As you have a kind heart, and have been
willing to share everything with me I will bring good to you. There
stands an old tree; chop it down, and you will find something at the
root." Then he took his leave and went his way.

Dummerly set to work, and cut down the tree; and when it fell, he
discovered in a hollow under the roots a goose with plumage of pure
gold. He took it up, and went on to an inn, where he proposed sleep for
the night. The landlord had three daughters, and when they saw the
goose, they were very curious to find out what this wonderful bird could
be, and wished very much to pluck one of the feathers out of its tail.
At last the eldest said, "I must and will have a feather." So she waited
till his back was turned, and then caught hold of the goose by the wing;
but to her great surprise, there she stuck, for neither hand nor finger
could she pull away again. Presently in came the second sister, and
thought to have a feather too; but the instant she touched her sister,
there she too hung fast. At last came the third, and desired a feather;
but the other two cried out, "Keep away! for heaven's sake, keep away!"
However, she did not understand what they meant. "If they are there,"
thought she, "I may as well be there too," so she went up to them. But
the moment she touched her sisters she stuck fast, and hung to the goose
as they did. And so they abode with the goose all night.

The next morning Dummerly carried off the goose under his arm, and took
no heed of the three girls, but went out with them sticking fast behind;
and wherever he journeyed, the three were obliged to follow, whether
they wished or not, as fast as their legs could carry them.

In the middle of a field the parson met them; and when he saw the
procession, he said, "Are you not ashamed of yourselves, you bold girls,
to run after the young man like that over the fields? Is that proper
behavior?"

Then he took the youngest by the hand to lead her away; but the moment
he touched her he, too, hung fast, and followed in the procession.

Presently up came the clerk; and when he saw his master, the parson,
running after the three girls, he was greatly surprised, and said,
"Hollo! hollo! your reverence! whither so fast! There is a christening
to-day."

Then he ran up, and caught him by the gown, and instantly he was fast
too.

As the five were thus trudging along, one after another, they met two
laborers with their mattocks coming from work; and the parson called out
to them to set him free. But hardly had they touched him, when they,
too, joined the ranks, and so made seven, all running after Dummerly and
his goose.

At last they came to a city, where reigned a King who had an only
daughter. The princess was of so thoughtful and serious a turn of mind
that no one could make her laugh; and the King had announced to all the
world that whoever could make her laugh should have her for his wife.
When the young man heard this, he went to her with the goose and all its
followers; and as soon as she saw the seven all hanging together, and
running about, treading on each other's heels, she could not help
bursting into a long and loud laugh.

Then Dummerly claimed her for his bride; the wedding took place, and he
was heir to the kingdom, and lived long and happily with his wife.




BEARSKIN


There was once upon a time a young fellow who enlisted for a soldier,
and became so brave and courageous that he was always in the front ranks
when it rained blue beans.[1] As long as the war lasted all went well,
but when peace was concluded he received his discharge, and the captain
told him he might go where he liked. His parents meanwhile had died, and
as he had no longer any home to go to he paid a visit to his brothers,
and asked them to give him shelter until war broke out again. His
brothers, however, were hard-hearted, and said, "What could we do with
you? We could make nothing of you; see to what you have brought
yourself"; and so turned a deaf ear. The poor Soldier had nothing but
his musket left; so he mounted this on his shoulder and set out on a
tramp. By and by he came to a great heath with nothing on it but a
circle of trees, under which he sat down, sorrowfully considering his
fate. "I have no money," thought he; "I have learnt nothing but
soldiering, and now, since peace is concluded, there is no need of me. I
see well enough I shall have to starve." All at once he heard a
rustling, and as he looked round he perceived a stranger standing before
him, dressed in a gray coat, who looked very stately, but had an ugly
cloven foot. "I know quite well what you need," said this being; "gold
and other possessions you shall have, as much as you can spend; but
first I must know whether you are a coward or not, that I may not spend
my money foolishly."

"A soldier and a coward!" replied the other, "that cannot be; you may
put me to any proof."

"Well, then," replied the stranger, "look behind you."

[Footnote 1: Small shot.]

The Soldier turned and saw a huge bear, which eyed him very ferociously.
"Oho!" cried he, "I will tickle your nose for you, that you shall no
longer be able to grumble"; and, raising his musket, he shot the bear in
the forehead, so that he tumbled in a heap upon the ground, and did not
stir afterward. Thereupon the stranger said, "I see quite well that you
are not wanting in courage; but there is yet one condition which you
must fulfil." "If it does not interfere with my future happiness," said
the Soldier, who had remarked who it was that addressed him; "if it does
not interfere with that, I shall not hesitate."

"That you must see about yourself!" said the stranger. "For the next
seven years you must not wash yourself, nor comb your hair or beard,
neither must you cut your nails nor say one paternoster. Then I will
give you this coat and mantle, which you must wear during these seven
years; and if you die within that time you are mine, but if you live you
are rich, and free all your life long."

The Soldier reflected for awhile on his great necessities, and,
remembering how often he had braved death, he at length consented, and
ventured to accept the offer. Thereupon the Evil One pulled off the gray
coat, handed it to the soldier, and said, "If you at any time search in
the pockets of your coat when you have it on, you will always find your
hand full of money." Then also he pulled off the skin of the bear, and
said, "That shall be your cloak and your bed; you must sleep on it, and
not dare to lie in any other bed, and on this account you shall be
called 'Bearskin.'" Immediately the Evil One disappeared.

The Soldier now put on the coat, and dipped his hands into the pockets,
to assure himself of the reality of the transaction. Then he hung the
bearskin around himself, and went about the world chuckling at his good
luck, and buying whatever suited his fancy which money could purchase.
For the first year his appearance was not very remarkable, but in the
second he began to look quite a monster. His hair covered almost all his
face, his beard appeared like a piece of dirty cloth, his nails were
claws, and his countenance was so covered with dirt that one might have
grown cresses upon it if one had sown seed! Whoever looked at him ran
away; but because he gave the poor in every place gold coin they prayed
that he might not die during the seven years; and because he paid
liberally everywhere, he found a night's lodging without difficulty. In
the fourth year he came to an inn where the landlord would not take him
in, and refused even to give him a place in his stables, lest the horses
should be frightened and become restive. However, when Bearskin put his
hand into his pocket and drew it out full of gold ducats the landlord
yielded the point, and gave him a place in the outbuildings, but not
till he had promised that he would not show himself, for fear the inn
should gain a bad name.

While Bearskin sat by himself in the evening, wishing from his heart
that the seven years were over, he heard in the corner a loud groan. Now
the old Soldier had a compassionate heart, so he opened the door and saw
an old man weeping violently and wringing his hands. Bearskin stepped
nearer, but the old man jumped up and tried to escape; but when he
recognized a human voice he let himself be persuaded, and by kind words
and soothings on the part of the old Soldier he at length disclosed the
cause of his distress. His property had dwindled away by degrees, and he
and his daughters would have to starve, for he was so poor that he had
not the money to pay the host, and would therefore be put into prison.

"If you have no care except that," replied Bearskin, "I have money
enough"; and causing the landlord to be called, he paid him, and put a
purse full of gold besides into the pocket of the old man. The latter,
when he saw himself released from his troubles, knew not how to be
sufficiently grateful, and said to the Soldier, "Come with me; my
daughters are all wonders of beauty, so choose one of them for a wife.
When they hear what you have done for me they will not refuse you. You
appear certainly an uncommon man, but they will soon put you to rights."

This speech pleased Bearskin, and he went with the old man. As soon as
the eldest daughter saw him, she was so terrified at his countenance
that she shrieked out and ran away. The second one stopped and looked at
him from head to foot; but at last she said, "How can I take a husband
who has not a bit of a human countenance? The grizzly bear would have
pleased me better who came to see us once, and gave himself out as a
man, for he wore a hussar's hat, and had white gloves on besides."

But the youngest daughter said, "Dear father, this must be a good man
who has assisted you out of your troubles; if you have promised him a
bride for the service your word must be kept"

It was a pity the man's face was covered with dirt and hair, else one
would have seen how glad at heart these words made him. Bearskin took a
ring off his finger, broke it in two, and, giving the youngest daughter
one half, he kept the other for himself. On her half he wrote his name,
and on his own he wrote hers, and begged her to preserve it carefully.
Thereupon he took leave, saying, "For three years longer I must wander
about; if I come back again, then we will celebrate our wedding; but if
I do not, you are free, for I shall be dead. But pray to God that he
will preserve my life."

When he was gone the poor bride clothed herself in black, and whenever
she thought of her bridegroom burst into tears. From her sisters she
received nothing but scorn and mocking. "Pay great attention when he
shakes your hand," said the eldest, "and you will see his beautiful
claws!" "Take care!" said the second, "bears are fond of sweets, and if
you please him he will eat you up, perhaps!" "You must mind and do his
will," continued the eldest, "or he will begin growling!" And the second
daughter said further, "But the wedding will certainly be merry, for
bears dance well!" The bride kept silence, and would not be drawn from
her purpose by all these taunts; and meanwhile Bearskin wandered about
in the world, doing good where he could, and giving liberally to the
poor, for which they prayed heartily for him. At length the last day of
the seven years approached, and Bearskin went and sat down again on the
heath beneath the circle of trees. In a very short time the wind
whistled, and the Evil One presently stood before him and looked at him
with a vexed face. He threw the Soldier his old coat and demanded his
gray one back. "We have not got so far as that yet," replied Bearskin;
"you must clean me first." Then the Evil One had, whether he liked it or
no, to fetch water, wash the old Soldier, comb his hair out, and cut his
nails. This done, he appeared again like a brave warrior, and indeed was
much handsomer than before.

As soon as the Evil One had disappeared, Bearskin became quite
light-hearted; and going into the nearest town he bought a fine velvet
coat, and hired a carriage drawn by four white horses, in which he was
driven to the house of his bride. Nobody knew him; the father took him
for some celebrated general, and led him into the room where his
daughters were. He was compelled to sit down between the two eldest, and
they offered him wine, and heaped his plate with the choicest morsels;
for they thought they had never seen any one so handsome before. But the
bride sat opposite to him dressed in black, neither opening her eyes nor
speaking a word. At length the Soldier asked the father if he would give
him one of his daughters to wife, and immediately the two elder sisters
arose, and ran to their chambers to dress themselves out in their most
becoming clothes, for each thought she should be chosen. Meanwhile the
stranger, as soon as he found himself alone with his bride, pulled out
the half of the ring and threw it into a cup of wine, which he handed
across the table. She took it, and as soon as she had drunk it and seen
the half ring lying at the bottom her heart beat rapidly, and she
produced the other half, which she wore round her neck on a riband. She
held them together, and they joined each other exactly, and the stranger
said, "I am your bridegroom, whom you first saw as Bearskin; but through
God's mercy I have regained my human form, and am myself once more."
With these words he embraced and kissed her; and at the same time the
two eldest sisters entered in full costume. As soon as they saw that the
very handsome man had fallen to the share of their youngest sister, and
heard that he was the same as "Bearskin," they ran out of the house full
of rage and jealousy.




CINDERELLA


The wife of a rich man fell sick: and when she felt that her end drew
nigh, she called her only daughter to her bedside, and said, "Always be
a good girl, and I will look down from heaven and watch over you." Soon
afterwards she shut her eyes and died, and was buried in the garden; and
the little girl went every day to her grave and wept, and was always
good and kind to all about her. And the snow spread a beautiful white
covering over the grave; but by the time the sun had melted it away
again, her father had married another wife. This new wife had two
daughters of her own: they were fair in face but foul at heart, and it
was now a sorry time for the poor little girl. "What does the
good-for-nothing thing want in the parlor?" said they; and they took
away her fine clothes, and gave her an old frock to put on, and laughed
at her and turned her into the kitchen.

Then she was forced to do hard work; to rise early, before daylight, to
bring the water, to make the fire, to cook and to wash. She had no bed
to lie down on, but was made to lie by the hearth among the ashes, and
they called her Cinderella.

It happened once that her father was going to the fair, and asked his
wife's daughters what he should bring to them. "Fine clothes," said the
first. "Pearls and diamonds," said the second. "Now, child," said he to
his own daughter, "what will you have?" "The first sprig, dear father,
that rubs against your hat on your way home," said she. Then he bought
for the two first the fine clothes and pearls and diamonds they had
asked for: and on his way home, as he rode through a green copse, a
sprig of hazel brushed against him, so he broke it off and when he got
home he gave it to his daughter. Then she took it, and went to her
mother's grave and planted it there, and cried so much that it was
watered with her tears; and there it grew and became a fine tree, and
soon a little bird came and built its nest upon the tree, and talked
with her and watched over her, and brought her whatever she wished for.

Now it happened that the king of the land held a feast which was to last
three days, and out of those who came to it his son was to choose a
bride for himself; and Cinderella's two sisters were asked to come. So
they called Cinderella, and said, "Now, comb our hair, brush our shoes,
and tie our sashes for us, for we are going to dance at the king's
feast." Then she did as she was told, but when all was done she could
not help crying, for she thought to herself, she would have liked to go
to the dance too, and at last she begged her mother very hard to let her
go, "You! Cinderella?" said she; "you who have nothing to wear, no
clothes at all, and who cannot even dance--you want to go to the ball?"
And when she kept on begging, to get rid of her, she said at last, "I
will throw this basinful of peas into the ash heap, and if you have
picked them all out in two hours' time you shall go to the feast too."
Then she threw the peas into the ashes; but the little maiden ran out at
the back door into the garden, and cried out--

  "Hither, thither, through the sky, turtle-doves and linnets, fly!
  Blackbird, thrush, and chaffinch gay, hither, thither, haste away!
  One and all, come, help me quick! haste ye, haste ye--pick, pick,
  pick!"

Then first came two white doves; and next two turtle-doves; and after
them all the little birds under heaven came, and the little doves
stooped their heads down and set to work, pick, pick, pick; and then the
others began to pick, pick, pick, and picked out all the good grain and
put it into a dish, and left the ashes. At the end of one hour the work
was done, and all flew out again at the windows. Then she brought the
dish to her mother. But the mother said, "No, no! indeed, you have no
clothes and cannot dance; you shall not go." And when Cinderella begged
very hard to go, she said, "If you can in one hour's time pick two of
these dishes of pease out of the ashes, you shall go too." So she shook
two dishes of peas into the ashes; but the little maiden went out into
the garden at the back of the house, and called as before and all the
birds came flying, and in half an hour's time all was done, and out they
flew again. And then Cinderella took the dishes to her mother, rejoicing
to think that she should now go to the ball. But her mother said, "It is
all of no use, you cannot go; you have no clothes, and cannot dance; and
you would only put us to shame;" and off she went with her two daughters
to the feast.

Now when all were gone, and nobody left at home, Cinderella went
sorrowfully and sat down under the hazel-tree, and cried out--

  "Shake, shake, hazel-tree, gold and silver over me!"

Then her friend the bird flew out of the tree and brought a gold and
silver dress for her, and slippers of spangled silk; and she put them
on, and followed her sisters to the feast. But they did not know her,
she looked so fine and beautiful in her rich clothes.

The king's son soon came up to her, and took her by the hand and danced
with her and no one else; and he never left her hand, but when any one
else came to ask her to dance, he said, "This lady is dancing with me."
Thus they danced till a late hour of the night, and then she wanted to
go home; and the king's son said, "I shall go and take care of you to
your home," for he wanted to see where the beautiful maid lived. But she
slipped away from him unawares, and ran off towards home, and the prince
followed her; then she jumped up into the pigeon-house and shut the
door. So he waited till her father came home, and told him that the
unknown maiden who had been at the feast had hidden herself in the
pigeon-house. But when they had broken open the door they found no one
within; and as they came back into the house, Cinderella lay, as she
always did, in her dirty frock by the ashes; for she had run as quickly
as she could through the pigeon-house and on to the hazel-tree, and had
there taken off her beautiful clothes, and laid them beneath the tree,
that the bird might carry them away; and had seated herself amid the
ashes again in her little old frock.

The next day, when the feast was again held, and her father, mother and
sisters were gone, Cinderella went to the hazel-tree, and all happened
as the evening before.

The king's son, who was waiting for her, took her by the hand and danced
with her; and, when any one asked her to dance, he said as before, "This
lady is dancing with me." When night came she wanted to go home; and the
king's son went with her, but she sprang away from him all at once into
the garden behind her father's house. In this garden stood a fine large
pear-tree; and Cinderella jumped up into it without being seen. Then the
king's son waited till her father came home, and said to him, "The
unknown lady has slipped away, and I think she must have sprung into the
pear-tree." The father ordered an axe to be brought, and they cut down
the tree, but found no one upon it. And when they came back into the
kitchen, there lay Cinderella in the ashes as usual; for she had slipped
down on the other side of the tree, and carried her beautiful clothes
back to the bird at the hazel-tree, and then put on her little old
frock.

The third day, when her father and mother and sisters were gone, she
went again into the garden, and said--

  "Shake, shake, hazel-tree, gold and silver over me!"

Then her kind friend the bird brought a dress still finer than the
former one, and slippers which were all of gold; and the king's son
danced with her alone, and when any one else asked her to dance, he
said, "This lady is my partner." Now when night came she wanted to go
home; and the king's son would go with her, but she managed to slip away
from him, though in such a hurry that she dropped her left golden
slipper upon the stairs.

So the prince took the shoe, and went the next day to the king, his
father, and said, "I will take for my wife the lady that this golden
shoe fits."

Then both the sisters were overjoyed to hear this; for they had
beautiful feet, and had no doubt that they could wear the golden
slipper. The eldest went first into the room where the slipper was, and
wanted to try it on, and the mother stood by. But her big toe could not
go into it, and the shoe was altogether much too small for her. Then the
mother said, "Never mind, cut it off. When you are queen you will not
care about toes; you will not want to go on foot." So the silly girl cut
her big toe off, and squeezed the shoe on, and went to the king's son.
Then he took her for his bride, and rode away with her.

But on their way home they had to pass by the hazel-tree that Cinderella
had planted, and there sat a little dove on the branch, singing--

  "Back again! back again! look to the shoe!
  The shoe is too small, and not made for you!
  Prince! prince! look again for thy bride,
  For she's not the true one that sits by thy side."

Then the prince looked at her foot, and saw by the blood that streamed
from it what a trick she had played him. So he brought the false bride
back to her home, and said, "This is not the right bride; let the other
sister try and put on the slipper." Then she went into the room and got
her foot into the shoe, all but the heel, which was too large. But her
mother squeezed it in till the blood came, and took her to the king's
son; and he rode away with her. But when they came to the hazel-tree,
the little dove sat there still, and sang as before. Then the king's son
looked down, and saw that the blood streamed from the shoe. So he
brought her back again also. "This is not the true bride," said he to
the father; "have you no other daughters?"

Then Cinderella came and she took her clumsy shoe off, and put on the
golden slipper, and it fitted as if it had been made for her. And when
he drew near and looked at her face the prince knew her, and said, "This
is the right bride."

Then he took Cinderella on his horse and rode away. And when they came
to the hazel-tree the white dove sang--

  "Prince! prince! take home thy bride,
  For she is the true one that sits by thy side!"




FAITHFUL JOHN


Once upon a time there lived an old King, who fell very sick, and
thought he was lying upon his death-bed; so he said, "Let faithful John
come to me." This faithful John was his affectionate servant, and was so
called because he had been true to him all his lifetime. As soon as John
came to the bedside, the King said, "My faithful John, I feel that my
end approaches, and I have no other care than about my son, who is still
so young that he cannot always guide himself aright. If you do not
promise to instruct him in everything he ought to know, and to be his
guardian, I cannot close my eyes in peace." Then John answered, "I will
never leave him; I will always serve him truly, even if it costs me my
life." So the old King was comforted, and said, "Now I can die in peace.
After my death you must show him all the chambers, halls, and vaults in
the castle, and all the treasures which are in them; but the last room
in the long corridor you must not show him, for in it hangs the portrait
of the daughter of the King of the Golden Palace; if he sees her
picture, he will conceive a great love for her, and will fall down in a
swoon, and on her account undergo great perils, therefore you must keep
him away." The faithful John pressed his master's hand again in token of
assent, and soon after the King laid his head upon the pillow and
expired.

After the old King had been borne to his grave, the faithful John
related to the young King all that his father had said upon his
death-bed, and declared, "All this I will certainly fulfil; I will be as
true to you as I was to him, if it costs me my life." When the time of
mourning was passed, John said to the young King, "It is now time for
you to see your inheritance; I will show you your paternal castle." So
he led the King all over it, upstairs and downstairs, and showed him all
the riches, and all the splendid chambers; only one room he did not
open, containing the perilous portrait, which was so placed that one saw
it directly the door was opened, and, moreover, it was so beautifully
painted that one thought it breathed and moved; nothing in all the world
could be more lifelike or more beautiful. The young King remarked,
however, that the faithful John always passed by one door, so he asked,
"Why do you not open that one?" "There is something in it," he replied,
"which will frighten you."

But the King said, "I have seen all the rest of the castle, and I will
know what is in there," and he went and tried to open the door by force.
The faithful John pulled him back, and said, "I promised your father
before he died that you should not see the contents of that room; it
would bring great misfortunes both upon you and me."

"Oh, no," replied the young King, "if I do not go in it will be my
certain ruin; I should have no peace night nor day until I had seen it
with my own eyes. Now I will not stir from the place till you unlock the
door."

Then the faithful John saw that it was of no use talking; so, with a
heavy heart and many sighs, he picked the key out of the great bunch.
When he had opened the door, he went in first, and thought he would
cover up the picture, that the King should not see it; but it was of no
use, for the King stepped upon tiptoes and looked over his shoulder; and
as soon as he saw the portrait of the maiden, which was so beautiful and
glittered with precious stones, he fell down on the ground insensible.
The faithful John lifted him up and carried him to his bed, and thought
with great concern, "Mercy on us! the misfortune has happened; what will
come of it?" and he gave the young King wine until he came to himself.
The first words he spoke were, "Who does that beautiful picture
represent?" "That is the daughter of the King of the Golden Palace," was
the reply.

"Then," said the King, "my love for her is so great that if all the
leaves on the trees had tongues, they should not gainsay it; my life is
set upon the search for her. You are my faithful John, you must
accompany me."

The trusty servant deliberated for a long while how to set about this
business, for it was very difficult to get into the presence of the
King's daughter. At last he bethought himself of a way, and said to the
King, "Everything which she has around her is of gold--chairs, tables,
dishes, bowls, and all the household utensils. Among your treasures are
five tons of gold; let one of the goldsmiths of your kingdom manufacture
vessels and utensils of all kinds therefrom--all kinds of birds, and
wild and wonderful beasts, such as will please her, then we will travel
with these, and try our luck." Then the King summoned all his
goldsmiths, who worked day and night until many very beautiful things
were ready. When all had been placed on board a ship, the faithful John
put on merchant's clothes, and the King likewise, so that they might
travel quite unknown. Then they sailed over the wide sea, and sailed
away until they came to the city where dwelt the daughter of the King of
the Golden Palace.

The faithful John told the King to remain in the ship, and wait for him.
"Perhaps," said he, "I shall bring the King's daughter with me;
therefore take care that all is in order, and set out the golden vessels
and adorn the whole ship." Thereupon John placed in a napkin some of the
golden cups, stepped upon land, and went straight to the King's palace.
When he came into the castle yard, a beautiful maid stood by the brook,
who had two golden pails in her hand, drawing water; and when she had
filled them and had turned round, she saw a strange man, and asked who
he was. Then John answered, "I am a merchant"; and opening his napkin he
showed her its contents. Then she exclaimed, "Oh, what beautiful golden
things!" and, setting the pails down, she looked at the cups one after
another, and said, "The King's daughter must see these; she is so
pleased with anything made of gold that she will buy all these." And
taking him by the hand, she led him in; for she was the lady's maid.
When the King's daughter saw the golden cups, she was much pleased, and
said, "They are so finely worked that I will purchase them all." But the
faithful John replied, "I am only the servant of a rich merchant; what I
have here is nothing in comparison to those which my master has in his
ship, than which nothing more delicate or costly has ever been worked in
gold." Then the King's daughter wished to have them all brought; but he
said, "It would take many days, and so great is the quantity that your
palace has not halls enough in it to place them around." Then her
curiosity and desire were still more excited, and at last she said,
"Take me to the ship; I will go myself and look at your master's
treasure."

The faithful John conducted her to the ship with great joy, and the
King, when he beheld her, saw that her beauty was still greater than the
picture had represented, and thought nothing else but that his heart
would jump out of his mouth. Presently she stepped on board, and the
King conducted her below; but the faithful John remained on deck by the
steersman, and told him to unmoor the ship and put on all the sail he
could, that it might fly as a bird through the air. Meanwhile the King
showed the Princess all the golden treasures--the dishes, cups, bowls,
the birds, the wild and wonderful beasts. Many hours passed away while
she looked at everything, and in her joy she did not remark that the
ship sailed on and on. As soon as she had looked at the last, and
thanked the merchant, she wished to depart. But when she came on deck,
she perceived that they were upon the high sea, far from the shore, and
were hastening on with all sail. "Ah," she exclaimed in affright, "I am
betrayed; I am carried off and taken away in the power of a strange
merchant. I would rather die!"

But the King, taking her by the hand, said, "I am not a merchant, but a
king, thine equal in birth. It is true that I have carried thee off; but
that is because of my overwhelming love for thee. Dost thou know that
when I first saw the portrait of thy beauteous face I fell down in a
swoon before it?" When the King's daughter heard these words, she was
reassured, and her heart was inclined toward him, so that she willingly
became his bride. While they thus went on their voyage on the high sea,
it happened that the faithful John, as he sat on the deck of the ship,
playing music, saw three crows in the air, who came flying toward them.
He stopped playing, and listened to what they were saying to each other,
for he understood them perfectly. The first one exclaimed, "There he is,
carrying home the daughter of the King of the Golden Palace." "But he is
not home yet," replied the second. "But he has her," said the third;
"she is sitting by him in the ship." Then the first began again, and
exclaimed, "What matters that? When they go on shore a fox-colored horse
will spring toward them, on which he will mount; and as soon as he is on
it, it will jump up with him into the air, so that he will never again
see his bride." The second one asked, "Is there no escape?" "Oh, yes, if
another mounts behind quickly, and takes out the firearms which are in
the holster, and with them shoots the horse dead, then the young King
will be saved. But who knows that? And if any one does know it, and
tells him, such a one will be turned to stone from the toe to the knee."
Then the second spoke again, "I know still more: if the horse should be
killed, the young King will not then retain his bride; for when they
come into the castle a beautiful bridal shirt will lie there upon a
dish, and seem to be woven of gold and silver, but it is nothing but
sulphur and pitch, and if he puts it on it will burn him to his marrow
and bones." Then the third Crow asked, "Is there no escape?" "Oh, yes,"
answered the second, "if some one takes up the shirt with his glove on,
and throws it into the fire, so that it is burnt, the young King will be
saved. But what does that signify? Whoever knows it, and tells him, will
be turned to stone from his knee to his heart." Then the third Crow
spoke: "I know still more: even if the bridal shirt be consumed, still
the young King will not retain his bride. For if, after the wedding, a
dance is held, while the young Queen dances she will suddenly turn pale,
and fall down as if dead; and if some one does not raise her up, and
take three drops of blood from her right breast and throw them away, she
will die. But whoever knows that, and tells it, will have his whole body
turned to stone, from the crown of his head to the toes of his feet."

After the crows had thus talked with one another, they flew away, and
the trusty John, who had perfectly understood all they had said, was
from that time very quiet and sad; for if he concealed from his master
what he had heard, misfortune would happen to him, and if he told him
all he must give up his own life. But at last he thought, "I will save
my master, even if I destroy myself."

As soon as they came on shore, it happened just as the Crow had
foretold, and an immense fox-red horse sprang up. "Capital!" said the
King, "this shall carry me to my castle," and he tried to mount; but the
faithful John came straight up, and swinging himself quickly on, drew
the firearms out of the holster and shot the horse dead. Then the other
servants of the King, who were not on good terms with the faithful John,
exclaimed, "How shameful to kill the beautiful creature, which might
have borne the King to the castle!" But the King replied, "Be silent,
and let him go; he is my very faithful John--who knows the good he may
have done?" Now they went into the castle, and there stood a dish in the
hall, and the splendid bridal shirt lay in it, and seemed nothing else
than gold and silver. The young King went up to it and wished to take it
up, but the faithful John pushed him away, and taking it up with his
gloves on, bore it quickly to the fire and let it burn. The other
servants thereupon began to murmur, saying, "See, now he is burning the
King's bridal shirt!" But the young King replied, "Who knows what good
he has done? Let him alone--he is my faithful John."

Soon after, the wedding was celebrated, and a grand ball was given, and
the bride began to dance. So the faithful John paid great attention, and
watched her countenance; all at once she grew pale, and fell as if dead
to the ground. Then he sprang up hastily, raised her up and bore her to
a chamber, where he laid her down, kneeled beside her, and drawing the
three drops of blood out of her right breast, threw them away. As soon
as she breathed again, she raised herself up; but the young King had
witnessed everything, and not knowing why the faithful John had done
this was very angry, and called out, "Throw him into prison!" The next
morning the trusty John was brought up for trial, and led to the
gallows; and as he stood upon them, and was about to be executed, he
said, "Every one condemned to die may once before his death speak. Shall
I also have that privilege?" "Yes," answered the King, "it shall be
granted you." Then the faithful John replied, "I have been unrighteously
judged, and have always been true to you"; and he narrated the
conversation of the crows which he heard at sea; and how, in order to
save his master, he was obliged to do all he had done. Then the King
cried out, "Oh, my most trusty John, pardon, pardon; lead him away!" But
the trusty John had fallen down at the last word and was turned into
stone.

At this event both the King and the Queen were in great grief, and the
King thought, "Ah, how wickedly have I rewarded his great fidelity!" and
he had the stone statue raised up and placed in his sleeping-chamber,
near his bed; and as often as he looked at it, he wept and said, "Ah,
could I bring you back to life again, my faithful John!"

After some time had passed, the Queen bore twins, two little sons, who
were her great joy. Once, when the Queen was in church, and the two
children at home playing by their father's side, he looked up at the
stone statue full of sorrow, and exclaimed with a sigh, "Ah, could I
restore you to life, my faithful John!" At these words the statue began
to speak, saying, "Yes, you can make me alive again, if you will bestow
on me that which is dearest to you." The King replied, "All that I have
in the world I will give up for you." The statue spake again: "If you,
with your own hand, cut off the heads of both your children, and
sprinkle me with their blood, I shall be brought to life again." The
King was terrified when he heard that he must himself kill his two dear
children; but he remembered his servant's great fidelity, and how the
faithful John had died for him, and drawing his sword he cut off the
heads of both his children with his own hand. And as soon as he had
sprinkled the statue with blood, life came back to it, and the trusty
John stood again alive and well before him, and said, "Your faith shall
not go unrewarded"; and taking the heads of the two children he set them
on again, and anointed their wounds with their blood, and thereupon they
healed again in a moment, and the children sprang away and played as if
nothing had happened.

Now the King was full of happiness, and as soon as he saw the Queen
coming, he hid the faithful John and both the children in a great
closet. As soon as she came in he said to her, "Have you prayed in the
church?" "Yes," she answered; "but I thought continually of the faithful
John, who has come to such misfortune through us." Then he replied, "My
dear wife, we can restore his life again to him, but it will cost us
both our little sons, whom we must sacrifice." The Queen became pale and
was terrified at heart, but she said, "We are guilty of his life on
account of his great fidelity." Then he was very glad that she thought
as he did, and going up to the closet, he unlocked it, brought out the
children and the faithful John, saying, "God be praised! he is saved,
and we have still our little sons"; and then he told her all that
happened. Afterward they lived happily together to the end of their
days.




THE WATER OF LIFE


Once upon a time there was a King who was so ill that everybody
despaired of his life, and his three sons were very sorry, and went out
into the palace gardens to weep. There they met an old man, who asked
the cause of their grief, and they told him their Father was so ill that
he must die, for nothing could save him. The old Man said, "I know a
means of saving him: if he drinks of the water of life it will restore
him to health; but it is very difficult to find."

"I will soon find it," said the eldest Son, and, going to the sick King,
he begged his permission to set out in search of the water of life,
which alone could save him. "No; the danger is too great," said the
King; "I prefer to die." Nevertheless, the Son begged and entreated so
long that the King consented, and the Prince went away, thinking in his
own heart, "If I bring this water I am the dearest to my Father, and I
shall inherit his kingdom."

After he had ridden a long way he met a Dwarf on the road, who asked
him, "Whither away so quickly?"

"You stupid dandyprat," replied the Prince proudly, "why should I tell
you that?" and he rode off. But the little Man was angry and he wished
an evil thing, so that, soon after, the Prince came into a narrow
mountain-pass, and the farther he rode the narrower it grew, till at
last it was so close that he could get no farther; but neither could he
turn his horse round, nor dismount, and he sat there like one amazed.
Meanwhile the sick King waited a long while for him, but he did not
come; and the second Son asked leave to go too and seek the water, for
he thought to himself, "If my Brother is dead the kingdom comes to me."
At first the King refused to spare him, but he gave way, and the Prince
set out on the same road as the elder one had taken, and met also the
same Dwarf, who stopped him and asked him, "Whither ride you so
hastily?" "Little dandyprat," replied the Prince, "what do you want to
know for?" and he rode off without looking round. The Dwarf, however,
enchanted him, and it happened to him as it had to his Brother: he came
to a defile where he could move neither forward nor backward. Such is
the fate of all haughty people.

Now, when the second Son did not return, the youngest begged leave to go
and fetch the water, and the King was obliged at last to give his
consent. When he met the Dwarf, and was asked whither he was going so
hurriedly, he stopped and replied, "I seek the water of life, for my
Father is sick unto death." "Do you know where to find it?" asked the
Dwarf. "No," replied the Prince. "Since you have behaved yourself as you
ought," said the Dwarf, "and not haughtily like your false Brothers, I
will give you information and show you where you may obtain the water of
life. It flows from a fountain in the court of an enchanted castle, into
which you can never penetrate if I do not give you an iron rod and two
loaves of bread. With the rod knock thrice at the iron door of the
castle, and it will spring open. Within lie two lions with open jaws,
but if you throw down to each a loaf of bread they will be quiet. Then
hasten and fetch some of the water of life before it strikes twelve, for
then the door will shut again, and you will be imprisoned."

The Prince thanked the Dwarf, and, taking the rod and bread, he set out
on his journey, and as he arrived at the castle he found it as the Dwarf
had said. At the third knock the door sprang open; and, when he had
stilled the lions with the bread, he walked into a fine, large hall,
where sat several enchanted Princes, from whose fingers he drew off the
rings, and he also took away with him a sword and some bread which lay
there. A little farther on he came to a room wherein stood a beautiful
maiden, who was so pleased to see him that she kissed him and said he
had freed her, and should have her whole kingdom, and if he came in
another year their wedding should be celebrated. Then she told him where
the fountain of water of life was placed, and he hastened away lest it
should strike twelve ere he gained it. He came next into a room where a
fine, clean covered bed stood, and, being tired, he lay down to rest
himself a bit. But he went to sleep, and when he awoke it struck the
quarter to twelve, and the sound made him hurry to the fountain, from
which he took some water in a cup which stood near. This done, he
hastened to the door, and was scarcely out before it struck twelve, and
the door swung to so heavily that it carried away a piece of his heel.

But he was very glad, in spite of this, that he had procured the water,
and he journeyed homeward, and passed again where the Dwarf stood. When
the Dwarf saw the sword and bread which he had brought away he declared
he had done well, for with the sword he could destroy whole armies--but
the bread was worth nothing. Now, the Prince was not willing to return
home to his Father without his Brothers, and so he said to the Dwarf,
"Dear Dwarf, can you tell me where my Brothers are? They went out before
me in search of the water of life, and did not return." "They are stuck
fast between two mountains," replied the Dwarf; "because they were so
haughty, I enchanted them there."

Then the Prince begged for their release, till at last the Dwarf brought
them out; but he warned the youngest to beware of them, for they had
evil in their hearts.

When his Brothers came he was very glad, and he related to them all that
had happened to him; how he had found the water of life and brought away
a cupful of it; and how he had rescued a beautiful Princess, who for a
whole year was going to wait for him, and then he was to return to be
married to her, and receive a rich kingdom. After this tale the three
Brothers rode away together, and soon entered a province where there
were war and famine raging, and the King thought he should perish, so
great was his necessity. The youngest Prince went to this King and gave
him the bread, with which he fed and satisfied his whole people; and
then the Prince gave him the sword, wherewith he defeated and slew all
his enemies, and regained peace and quiet. This effected, the Prince
took back the bread and sword, and rode on farther with his Brothers,
and by and by they came to two other provinces where also war and famine
were destroying the people. To each King the Prince lent his bread and
sword, and so saved three kingdoms. After, this they went on board a
ship to pass over the sea which separated them from home, and during the
voyage the two elder Brothers said to one another, "Our Brother has
found the water of life and we have not; therefore our Father will give
the kingdom which belongs to us to him, and our fortune will be taken
away." Indulging these thoughts they became so envious that they
consulted together how they should kill him, and one day, waiting till
he was fast asleep, they poured the water out of his cup and took it for
themselves, while they filled his up with bitter salt water. As soon as
they arrived at home the youngest Brother took his cup to the sick King,
that he might drink out of it and regain his health. But scarcely had he
drunk a very little of the water when he became worse than before, for
it was as bitter as wormwood. While the King lay in this state, the two
elder Princes came, and accused their Brother of poisoning their Father;
but they had brought the right water, and they handed it to the King.
Scarcely had he drunk a little out of the cup when the King felt his
sickness leave him, and soon he was as strong and healthy as in his
young days. The two Brothers now went to the youngest Prince, mocking
him, and saying, "You certainly found the water of life; but you had the
trouble and we had the reward; you should have been more cautious and
kept your eyes open, for we took your cup while you were asleep on the
sea; and, moreover, in a year one of us intends to fetch your Princess.
Beware, however, that you betray us not; the King will not believe you,
and if you say a single word your life will be lost; but if you remain
silent you are safe." The old King, nevertheless, was very angry with
his youngest Son, who had conspired, as he believed, against his life.
He caused his court to be assembled, and sentence was given to the
effect that the Prince should be secretly shot; and once as he rode out
hunting, unsuspicious of any evil, the Huntsman was sent with him to
perform the deed. By and by, when they were alone in the wood, the
Huntsman seemed so sad that the Prince asked him what ailed him. The
Huntsman replied, "I cannot and yet must tell you." "Tell me boldly what
it is," said the Prince, "I will forgive you." "Ah, it is no other than
that I must shoot you, for so has the King ordered me," said the
Huntsman, with a deep sigh.

The Prince was frightened, and said, "Let me live, dear Huntsman, let me
live! I will give you my royal coat and you shall give me yours in
exchange." To this the Huntsman readily assented, for he felt unable to
shoot the Prince, and after they had exchanged their clothing the
Huntsman returned home, and the Prince went deeper into the wood.

A short time afterward three wagons laden with gold and precious stones
came to the King's palace for his youngest Son. They were sent by the
three Kings in token of gratitude for the sword which had defeated their
enemies, and the bread which had nourished their people. At this arrival
the old King said to himself, "Perhaps, after all, my Son was
guiltless," and he lamented to his courtiers that he had let his Son be
killed. But the Huntsman cried out, "He lives yet! for I could not find
it in my heart to fulfil your commands"; and he told the King how it had
happened. The King felt as if a stone had been removed from his heart,
and he caused it to be proclaimed everywhere throughout his dominions
that his Son might return and would again be taken into favor.

Meanwhile the Princess had caused a road to be made up to her castle of
pure shining gold, and she told her attendants that whoever should ride
straight up this road would be the right person, and one whom they might
admit into the castle; but, on the contrary, whoever should ride up not
on the road, but by the side, they were ordered on no account to admit,
for he was not the right person. When, therefore, the time came round
which the Princess had mentioned to the youngest Prince, the eldest
Brother thought he would hasten to her castle and announce himself as
her deliverer, that he might gain her as a bride and the kingdom
besides. So he rode away, and when he came in front of the castle and
saw the fine golden road he thought it would be a shame to ride thereon,
and so he turned to the left hand and rode up out of the road. But as he
came up to the door the guards told him he was not the right person, and
he must ride back again. Soon afterward the second Prince also set out,
and he, likewise, when he came to the golden road and his horse set its
forefeet upon it, thought it would be a pity to travel upon it, so he
turned aside to the right hand and went up. When he came to the gate the
guards refused him admittance, and told him he was not the person
expected, and so he had to return homeward. The youngest Prince, who had
all this time been wandering about in the forest, had also remembered
that the year was up, and soon after his Brothers' departure he appeared
before the castle and rode up straight on the golden road, for he was so
deeply engaged in thinking of his beloved Princess that he did not
observe it. As soon as he arrived at the door it was opened, and the
Princess received him with joy, saving he was her deliverer and the lord
of her dominions. Soon after their wedding was celebrated, and when it
was over the Princess told her husband that his Father had forgiven him
and desired to see him. Thereupon he rode to the old King's palace, and
told him how his Brothers had betrayed him while he slept, and had sworn
him to silence. When the King heard this he would have punished the
false Brothers, but they had prudently taken themselves off in a ship,
and they never returned home afterward.




THUMBLING


There was once a poor peasant who sat in the evening by the hearth and
poked the fire, and his wife sat and span. Then said he, "How sad it is
that we have no children! With us all is so quiet, and in other houses
it is noisy and lively."

"Yes," replied the wife, and sighed, "even if we had only one, and it
were quite small, and only as big as a thumb, I should be quite
satisfied, and we would still love it with all our hearts." Now it so
happened that their wish was granted and a child was given them, but
although it was perfect in all its limbs, it was no longer than a thumb.
Then said they, "It is as we wished it to be, and it shall be our dear
child;" and because of its size, they called it Thumbling. They did not
let it want for food, but the child did not grow taller, but remained as
it had been at the first, nevertheless it looked sensibly out of its
eyes, and soon showed itself to be a wise and nimble creature, for
everything it did turned out well.

One day the peasant was getting ready to go into the forest to cut wood,
when he said as if to himself, "How I wish that there was any one who
would bring the cart to me!" "Oh, father," cried Thumbling, "I will soon
bring the cart; rely on that; it shall be in the forest at the appointed
time." The man smiled and said, "How can that be done; you are far too
small to lead the horse by the reins?" "That's of no consequence,
father, if my mother will only harness it, I will sit in the horse's
ear, and call out to him how he is to go." "Well," answered the man,
"for once we will try it."

When the time came, the mother harnessed the horse, and placed Thumbling
in its ear, and then the little creature cried, "Gee up, gee up!"

Then it went quite properly as if with its master, and the cart went the
right way into the forest. It so happened that just as he was turning a
corner, and the little one was crying, "Gee up," two strange men came
towards him. "My word!" said one of them. "What is this? There is a cart
coming, and a driver is calling to the horse, and still he is not to be
seen!" "That can't be right," said the other, "we will follow the cart
and see where it stops." The cart, however, drove right into the forest,
and exactly to the place where the wood had been cut. When Thumbling saw
his father, he cried to him, "See, father, here I am with the cart; now
take me down." The father got hold of the horse with his left hand, and
with the right took his little son out of the ear. Thumbling sat down
quite merrily on a straw, but when the two strange men saw him, they did
not know what to say for astonishment. Then one of them took the other
aside and said, "Hark, the little fellow would make our fortune if we
exhibited him in a large town, for money. We will buy him." They went to
the peasant and said, "Sell us the little man. He shall be well treated
with us." "No," replied the father, "he is the apple of my eye, and all
the money in the world cannot buy him from me." Thumbling, however, when
he heard of the bargain, had crept up the folds of his father's coat,
placed himself on his shoulder, and whispered in his ear. "Father, do
give me away; I will soon come back again." Then the father parted with
him to the two men for a handsome bit of money. "Where do you want to
sit?" they said to him. "Oh, just set me on the rim of your hat, and
then I can walk backwards and forwards and look at the country, and
still not fall down." They did as he wished, and when Thumbling had
taken leave of his father, they went away with him. They walked until it
was dusk, and then the little fellow said, "Do take me down; I want to
come down." The man took his hat off, and put the little fellow on the
ground by the wayside, and he leapt and crept about a little between the
sods, and then he suddenly slipped into a mouse-hole which he had sought
out. "Good-evening, gentlemen, just go home without me," he cried to
them, and mocked them. They ran thither and stuck their sticks into the
mouse-hole, but it was all lost labor. Thumbling crept still farther in,
and as it soon became quite dark, they were forced to go home with their
vexation and their empty purses.

When Thumbling saw that they were gone, he crept back out of the
subterranean passage. "It is so dangerous to walk on the ground in the
dark," said he; "how easily a neck or a leg is broken!" Fortunately, he
knocked against an empty snail-shell. "Thank God!" said he. "In that I
can pass the night in safety," and got into it. Not long afterwards,
when he was just going to sleep, he heard two men go by, and one of them
was saying, "How shall we contrive to get hold of the rich pastor's
silver and gold?" "I could tell you that," cried Thumbling, interrupting
them. "What was that?" said one of the thieves in a fright; "I heard
some one speaking." They stood still listening, and Thumbling spoke
again and said, "Take me with you, and I'll help you."

"But where are you?" "Just look on the ground, and observe from where my
voice comes," he replied. There the thieves at length found him, and
lifted him up. "You little imp, how will you help us?" they said. "A
great deal," said he; "I will creep into the pastor's room through the
iron bars, and will reach out to you whatever you want to have." "Come,
then," they said, "and we will see what you can do." When they got to
the pastor's house, Thumbling crept into the room, but instantly cried
out with all his might, "Do you want to have everything that is here?"
The thieves were alarmed, and said, "But do speak softly, so as not to
waken any one!" Thumbling, however, behaved as if he had not understood
this, and cried again, "What do you want? Do you want to have everything
that is here?" The cook, who slept in the next room, heard this and sat
up in bed, and listened. The thieves, however, had in their fright run
some distance away, but at last they took courage, and thought, "The
little rascal wants to mock us." They came back and whispered to him,
"Come, be serious, and reach something out to us." Then Thumbling again
cried as loudly as he could, "I really will give you everything, only
put your hands in." The maid who was listening, heard this quite
distinctly, and jumped out of bed and rushed to the door. The thieves
took flight, and ran as if the Wild Huntsman were behind them, but as
the maid could not see anything, she went to strike a light. When she
came to the place with it, Thumbling, unperceived, hid himself in the
granary, and the maid, after she had examined every corner and found
nothing, lay down in her bed again, and believed that, after all, she
had only been dreaming with open eyes and ears.

Thumbling had climbed up among the hay and found a beautiful place to
sleep in: there he intended to rest until day, and then go home again to
his parents. But he had other things to go through. Truly there is much
affliction and misery in this world! When day dawned, the maid arose
from her bed to feed the cows. Her first walk was into the barn, where
she laid hold of an armful of hay, and precisely that very one in which
poor Thumbling was lying asleep. He, however, was sleeping so soundly
that he was aware of nothing, and did not awake until he was in the
mouth of the cow, who had picked him up with the hay. "Ah, heavens!"
cried he, "how have I got into the fulling mill?" but he soon discovered
where he was. Then it was necessary to be careful not to let himself go
between the teeth and be dismembered, but he was nevertheless forced to
slip down into the stomach with the hay. "In this little room the
windows are forgotten," said he, "and no sun shines in, neither will a
candle be brought." His quarters were especially unpleasing to him, and
the worst was, more and more hay was always coming in by the door, and
the space grew less and less. Then, at length in his anguish, he cried
as loud as he could, "Bring me no more fodder, bring me no more fodder."
The maid was just milking the cow, and when she heard some one speaking,
and saw no one, and perceived that it was the same voice that she had
heard in the night, she was so terrified that she slipped off her stool,
and spilt the milk. She ran in the greatest haste to her master, and
said, "Oh, heavens, pastor, the cow has been speaking!" "You are mad,"
replied the pastor; but he went himself to the byre to see what was
there. Hardly, however, had he set his foot inside than Thumbling again
cried, "Bring me no more fodder, bring me no more fodder." Then the
pastor himself was alarmed, and thought that an evil spirit had gone
into the cow, and ordered her to be killed. She was killed, but the
stomach, in which Thumbling was, was thrown on the midden. Thumbling had
great difficulty in working his way out; however, he succeeded so far as
to get some room, but, just as he was going to thrust his head out, a
new misfortune occurred. A hungry wolf ran thither, and swallowed the
whole stomach at one gulp. Thumbling did not lose courage. "Perhaps,"
thought he, "the wolf will listen to what I have got to say," and he
called to him from out of his stomach, "Dear wolf, I know of a
magnificent feast for you."

"Where is it to be had?" said the wolf.

"In such and such a house; you must creep into it through the
kitchen-sink; you will find cakes, and bacon, and sausages, and as much
of them as you can eat," and he described to him exactly his father's
house. The wolf did not require to be told this twice, squeezed himself
in at night through the sink, and ate to his heart's content in the
larder. When he had eaten his fill, he wanted to go out again, but he
had become so big that he could not go out by the same way. Thumbling
had reckoned on this, and now began to make a violent noise in the wolfs
body, and raged and screamed as loudly as he could. "Will you be quiet,"
said the wolf; "you will waken up the people!" "Eh, what," replied the
little fellow, "you have eaten your fill, and I will make merry
likewise," and began once more to scream with all his strength. At last
his father and mother were aroused by it, and ran to the room and looked
in through the opening in the door. When they saw that a wolf was
inside, they ran away, and the husband fetched his axe, and the wife the
scythe. "Stay behind," said the man, when they entered the room. "When I
have given him a blow, if he is not killed by it, you must cut him down
and hew his body to pieces." Then Thumbling heard his parents' voices,
and cried, "Dear father, I am here; I am in the wolf's body." Said the
father, full of joy, "Thank God, our dear child has found us again," and
bade the woman take away her scythe, that Thumbling might not be hurt
with it. After that he raised his arm, and struck the wolf such a blow
on his head that he fell down dead, and then they got knives and
scissors and cut his body open, and drew the little fellow forth. "Ah,"
said the father, "what sorrow we have gone through for your sake." "Yes,
father, I have gone about the world a great deal. Thank heaven, I
breathe fresh air again!" "Where have you been, then?" "Ah, father, I
have been in a mouse's hole, in a cow's stomach, and then in a wolf's;
now I will stay with you." "And we will not sell you again; no, not for
all the riches in the world," said his parents, and they embraced and
kissed their dear Thumbling.




BRIAR ROSE


Once upon a time there lived a king and queen who had no children; and
this they lamented very much. But one day, as the queen was walking by
the side of the river, a little fish lifted its head out of the water,
and said, "Your wish shall be fulfilled, and you shall soon have a
daughter."

What the little fish had foretold soon came to pass; and the queen had a
little girl who was so very beautiful that the king could not cease
looking on her for joy, and determined to hold a great feast. So he
invited not only his relations, friends, and neighbors, but also all the
fairies, that they might be kind and good to his little daughter. Now
there were thirteen fairies in his kingdom, and he had only twelve
golden dishes for them to eat out of, so that he was obliged to leave
one of the fairies without an invitation. The rest came, and after the
feast was over they gave all their best gifts to the little princess;
one gave her virtue, another beauty, another riches, and so on till she
had all that was excellent in the world. When eleven had done blessing
her, the thirteenth, who had not been invited, and was very angry on
that account, came in, and determined to take her revenge. So she cried
out, "The king's daughter shall in her fifteenth year be wounded by a
spindle, and fall down dead." Then the twelfth, who had not yet given
her gift, came forward and said that the bad wish must be fulfilled, but
that she could soften it, and that the king's daughter should not die,
but fall asleep for a hundred years.

But the king hoped to save his dear child from the threatened evil, and
ordered that all the spindles in the kingdom should be bought up and
destroyed. All the fairies' gifts were in the meantime fulfilled; for
the princess was so beautiful, and well-behaved and amiable, and wise,
that every one who knew her loved her.

Now it happened that on the very day she was fifteen years old the king
and queen were not at home, and she was left alone in the palace. So she
roamed about by herself, and looked at all the rooms and chambers, till
at last she came to an old tower, to which there was a narrow staircase
ending with a little door. In the door there was a golden key, and when
she turned it the door sprang open, and there sat an old lady spinning
away very busily.

"Why, how now, good mother," said the princess, "what are you doing
there?"

"Spinning," said the old lady, and nodded her head. "How prettily that
little thing turns round!" said the princess, and took the spindle and
began to spin. But scarcely had she touched it before the prophecy was
fulfilled, and she fell down lifeless on the ground.

However, she was not dead, but had only fallen into a deep sleep; and
the king and the queen, who just then came home, and all their court,
fell asleep too, and the horses slept in the stables, and the dogs in
the yard, and the pigeons on the house-top, and the flies on the walls.
Even the fire on the I  hearth left off blazing, and went to sleep; and
the meat that was roasting stood still; and the cook, who was at that
moment pulling the kitchen-boy by the hair to give him a box on the ear
for something he had done amiss, let him go, and both fell asleep; and
so everything stood still, and slept soundly.

A high hedge of thorns soon grew around the palace, and every year it
became higher and thicker, till at last the whole palace was surrounded
and hidden, so that not even the roof or the chimneys could be seen.

But there went a report through all the land of the beautiful sleeping
Briar Rose, for thus was the king's daughter called; so that from time
to time several kings' sons came, and tried to break through the thicket
into the palace.

This they could never do; for the thorns and bushes laid hold of them as
it were with hands, and there they stuck fast and died miserably.

After many, many years there came another king's son into that land, and
an old man told him the story of the thicket of thorns, and how a
beautiful palace stood behind it, in which was a wondrous princess,
called Briar Rose, asleep with all her court. He told, too, how he had
heard from his grandfather that many, many princes had come, and had
tried to break through the thicket, but had stuck fast and died.

Then the young prince said, "All this shall not frighten me; I will go
and see Briar Rose." The old man tried to dissuade him, but he persisted
in going.

Now that very day the hundred years were completed; and as the prince
came to the thicket he saw nothing but beautiful flowering shrubs,
through which he passed with ease, and they closed after him as firm as
ever.

Then he came at last to the palace, and there in the yard lay the dogs
asleep, and the horses in the stables, and on the roof sat the pigeons
fast asleep with their heads under their wings; and when he came into
the palace, the flies slept on the walls, and the cook in the kitchen
was still holding up her hand as if she would beat the boy, and the maid
sat with a black fowl in her hand ready to be plucked.

Then he went on still further, and all was so still that he could hear
every breath he drew; till at last he came to the old tower and opened
the door of the little room in which Briar Rose was, and there she lay
fast asleep, and looked so beautiful that he could not take his eyes
off, and he stooped down and gave her a kiss. But the moment he kissed
her she opened her eyes and awoke, and smiled upon him.

Then they went out together, and presently the king and queen also
awoke, and all the court, and they gazed on each other with great
wonder.

And the horses got up and shook themselves, and the dogs jumped about
and barked; the pigeons took their heads from under their wings, and
looked about and flew into the fields; the flies on the walls buzzed
away; the fire in the kitchen blazed up and cooked the dinner, and the
roast meat turned round again; the cook gave the boy the box on his ear
so that he cried out, and the maid went on plucking the fowl.

And then was the wedding of the prince and Briar Rose celebrated, and
they lived happily together all their lives.




THE SIX SWANS


A King was once hunting in a large wood, and pursued his game so hotly
that none of his courtiers could follow him. But when evening approached
he stopped, and looking around him perceived that he had lost himself.
He sought a path out of the forest but could not find one, and presently
he saw an old woman, with a nodding head, who came up to him. "My good
woman," said he to her, "can you not show me the way out of the forest?"
"Oh, yes, my lord King," she replied; "I can do that very well, but upon
one condition, which if you do not fulfil, you will never again get out
of the wood, but will die of hunger."

"What, then, is this condition?" asked the King.

"I have a daughter," said the old woman, "who is as beautiful as any one
you can find in die whole world, and well deserves to be your bride.
Now, if you will make her your Queen, I will show you your way out of
the wood." In the anxiety of his heart, the King consented, and the old
woman led him to her cottage, where the daughter was sitting by the
fire. She received the King as if she had expected him, and he saw at
once that she was very beautiful, but yet she did not quite please him,
for he could not look at her without a secret shuddering. However, he
took the maiden upon his horse, and the old woman showed him the way,
and the King arrived safely at his palace, where the wedding was to be
celebrated.

The King had been married once before, and had seven children by his
first wife, six boys and a girl, whom he loved above everything else in
the world. He became afraid, soon, that the step-mother might not treat
his children very well, and might even do them some great injury, so he
took them away to a lonely castle which stood in the midst of a forest.
The castle was so entirely hidden, and the way to it was so difficult to
discover, that he himself could not have found it if a wise woman had
not given him a ball of cotton which had the wonderful property, when he
threw it before him, of unrolling itself and showing him the right path.
The King went, however, so often to see his dear children, that the
Queen, noticing his absence, became inquisitive, and wished to know what
he went to fetch out of the forest. So she gave his servants a great
quantity of money, and they disclosed to her the secret, and also told
her of the ball of cotton which alone could show her the way. She had
now no peace until she discovered where this ball was concealed, and
then she made some fine silken shirts, and, as she had learnt of her
mother, she sewed within each a charm. One day soon after, when the King
was gone out hunting, she took the little shirts and went into the
forest, and the cotton showed her the path. The children, seeing some
one coming in the distance, thought it was their dear father, and ran
out full of joy. Then she threw over each of them a shirt, that, as it
touched their bodies, changed them into Swans, which flew away over the
forest. The Queen then went home quite contented, and thought she was
free of her step-children; but the little girl had not met her with the
brothers, and the Queen did not know of her.

The following day the King went to visit his children, but he found only
the Maiden. "Where are your brothers?" asked he. "Ah, dear father," she
replied, "they are gone away and have left me alone"; and she told him
how she had looked out of the window and seen them changed into Swans,
which had flown over the forest; and then she showed him the feathers
which they had dropped in the courtyard, and which she had collected
together. The King was much grieved, but he did not think that his wife
could have done this wicked deed, and, as he feared the girl might also
be stolen away, he took her with him. She was, however, so much afraid
of the step-mother, that she begged him not to stop more than one night
in the castle.

The poor Maiden thought to herself, "This is no longer my place; I will
go and seek my brothers"; and when night came she escaped and went quite
deep into the wood. She walked all night long, and a great part of the
next day, until she could go no further from weariness. Just then she
saw a rough-looking hut, and going in, she found a room with six little
beds, but she dared not get into one, so crept under, and laying herself
upon the hard earth, prepared to pass the night there. Just as the sun
was setting, she heard a rustling, and saw six white Swans come flying
in at the window. They settled on the ground and began blowing one
another until they had blown all their feathers off, and their swan's
down slipped from them like a shirt. Then the Maiden knew them at once
for her brothers, and gladly crept out from under the bed, and the
brothers were not less glad to see their sister, but their joy was of
short duration. "Here you must not stay," said they to her; "this is a
robbers' hiding-place; if they should return and find you here, they
would murder you."

"Can you not protect me, then?" inquired the sister.

"No," they replied; "for we can only lay aside our swan's feathers for a
quarter of an hour each evening, and for that time we regain our human
form, but afterwards we resume our changed appearance."

Their sister then asked them, with tears, "Can you not be restored
again?"

"Oh, no," replied they; "the conditions are too difficult. For six long
years you must neither speak nor laugh, and during that time you must
sew together for us six little shirts of star-flowers, and should there
fall a single word from your lips, then all your labor will be in vain."
Just as the brothers finished speaking, the quarter of an hour elapsed,
and they all flew out of the window again like Swans.

The little sister, however, made a solemn resolution to rescue her
brothers, or die in the attempt; and she left the cottage, and,
penetrating deep into the forest, passed the night amid the branches of
a tree. The next morning she went out and collected the star-flowers to
sew together. She had no one to converse with and for laughing she had
no spirits, so there up in the tree she sat, intent upon her work.

After she had passed some time there, it happened that the King of that
country was hunting in the forest, and his huntsmen came beneath the
tree on which the Maiden sat. They called to her and asked, "Who art
thou?" But she gave no answer. "Come down to us," continued they; "we
will do thee no harm." She simply shook her head, and when they pressed
her further with questions, she threw down to them her gold necklace,
hoping therewith to satisfy them. They did not, however, leave her, and
she threw down her girdle, but in vain! and even her rich dress did not
make them desist. At last the huntsman himself climbed the tree and
brought down the Maiden, and took her before the King.

The King asked her, "Who art thou? What dost thou upon that tree?" But
she did not answer; and then he questioned her in all the languages that
he knew, but she remained dumb to all, as a fish. Since, however, she
was so beautiful, the King's heart was touched, and he conceived for her
a strong affection. Then he put around her his cloak, and, placing her
before him on his horse, took her to his castle. There he ordered rich
clothing to be made for her, and, although her beauty shone as the
sunbeams, not a word escaped her. The King placed her by his side at
table, and there her dignified mien and manners so won upon him, that he
said, "This Maiden will I marry, and no other in the world;" and after
some days he wedded her.

Now, the King had a wicked step-mother, who was discontented with his
marriage, and spoke evil of the young Queen. "Who knows whence the wench
comes?" said she. "She who cannot speak is not worthy of a King." A year
after, when the Queen brought her first-born into the world, the old
woman took him away. Then she went to the King and complained that the
Queen was a murderess. The King, however, would not believe it, and
suffered no one to do any injury to his wife, who sat composedly sewing
at her shirts and paying attention to nothing else. When a second child
was born, the false stepmother used the same deceit, but the King again
would not listen to her words, saying, "She is too pious and good to act
so; could she but speak and defend herself, her innocence would come to
light." But when again, the old woman stole away the third child, and
then accused the Queen, who answered not a word to the accusation, the
King was obliged to give her up to be tried, and she was condemned to
suffer death by fire.

When the time had elapsed, and the sentence was to be carried out, it
happened that the very day had come round when her dear brothers should
be set free; the six shirts were also ready, all but the last, which yet
wanted the left sleeve. As she was led to the scaffold, she placed the
shirts upon her arm, and just as she had mounted it, and the fire was
about to be kindled, she looked around, and saw six Swans come flying
through the air. Her heart leapt for joy as she perceived her deliverers
approaching, and soon the Swans, flying towards her, alighted so near
that she was enabled to throw over them the shirts, and as soon as she
had done so, their feathers fell off and the brothers stood up alive and
well; but the youngest was without his left arm, instead of which he had
a swan's wing. They embraced and kissed each other, and the Queen, going
to the King, who was thunderstruck, began to say, "Now may I speak, my
dear husband, and prove to you that I am innocent and falsely accused;"
and then she told him how the wicked woman had stolen away and hidden
her three children. When she had concluded, the King was overcome with
joy, and the wicked stepmother was led to the scaffold and bound to the
stake and burnt to ashes. The King and Queen for ever after lived in
peace and prosperity with their six brothers.




RAPUNZEL


There were once a man and a woman who had long in in vain wished for a
child. At length the woman hoped that God was about to grant her desire.
These people had a little window at the back of their house from which a
splendid garden could be seen, which was full of the most beautiful
flowers and herbs. It was, however, surrounded by a high wall, and no
one dared to go into it because it belonged to an enchantress, who had
great power and was dreaded by all the world. One day the woman was
standing by this window and looking down into the garden, when she saw a
bed which was planted with the most beautiful rampion (rapunzel), and it
looked so fresh and green that she longed for it, and had the greatest
desire to eat some. This desire increased every day, and as she knew
that she could not get any of it, she quite pined away, and looked pale
and miserable. Then her husband was alarmed, and asked, "What ails you,
dear wife?" "Ah," she replied, "if I can't get some of the rampion which
is in the garden behind our house, to eat, I shall die." The man, who
loved her, thought, "Sooner than let your wife die, bring her some of
the rampion yourself, let it cost you what it will." In the twilight of
evening, he clambered down over the wall into the garden of the
enchantress, hastily clutched a handful of rampion, and took it to his
wife. She at once made herself a salad of it, and ate it with much
relish. She, however, liked it so much, so very much, that the next day
she longed for it three times as much as before. If he was to have any
rest, her husband must once more descend into the garden. In the gloom
of evening, therefore, he let himself down again; but when he had
clambered down the wall he was terribly afraid, for he saw the
enchantress standing before him. "How can you dare," said she with angry
look, "to descend into my garden and steal my rampion like a thief? You
shall suffer for it!" "Ah," answered he, "let mercy take the place of
justice. I only made up my mind to do it out of necessity. My wife saw
your rampion from the window, and felt such a longing for it that she
would have died if she had not got some to eat." Then the enchantress
allowed her anger to be softened, and said to him, "If the case be as
you say, I will allow you to take away with you as much rampion as you
will, only I make one condition, you must give me the child which your
wife will bring into the world; it shall be well treated, and I will
care for it like a mother." The man in his terror consented to
everything, and when the little one came to them, the enchantress
appeared at once, gave the child the name of Rapunzel, and took it away
with her.

Rapunzel grew into the most beautiful child beneath the sun. When she
was twelve years old, the enchantress shut her into a tower, which lay
in a forest, and had neither stairs nor door, but quite at the top was a
little window. When the enchantress wanted to go in, she placed herself
beneath this, and cried,

  "Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair to me."

Rapunzel had magnificent long hair, fine as spun gold, and when she
heard the voice of the enchantress she unfastened her braided tresses,
wound them round one of the hooks of the window above, and then the hair
fell twenty yards down, and the enchantress climbed up by it.

After a year or two, it came to pass that the King's son rode through
the forest and went by the tower. Then he heard a song, which was so
charming that he stood still and listened. This was Rapunzel, who in her
solitude passed her time in letting her sweet voice resound. The King's
son wanted to climb up to her, and looked for the door of the tower, but
none was to be found. He rode home, but the singing had so deeply
touched his heart, that every day he went out into the forest and
listened to it. Once when he was thus standing behind a tree, he saw
that an enchantress came there, and he heard how she cried,

  "Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair."

Then Rapunzel let down the braids of her hair, and the enchantress
climbed up to her. "If that is the ladder by which one mounts, I will
for once try my fortune," said he, and the next day, when it began to
grow dark, he went to the tower and cried.

  "Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair."

Immediately the hair fell down, and the King's son climbed up.

At first Rapunzel was terribly frightened when a man such as her eyes
had never yet beheld came to her; but the King's son began to talk to
her quite like a friend, and told her that his heart had been so stirred
that it had let him have no rest, and he had been forced to see her.
Then Rapunzel lost her fear, and when he asked her if she would take him
for a husband, and she saw that he was young and handsome, she thought,
"He will love me more than old Dame Gothel does;" and she said yes, and
laid her hand in his. She said, "I will willingly go away with you, but
I do not know how to get down. Bring with you a skein of silk every time
that you come, and I will weave a ladder with it, and when that is ready
I will descend, and you will take me on your horse." They agreed that
until that time he should come to her every evening, for the old woman
came by day. The enchantress remarked nothing of this, until once
Rapunzel said to her, "Tell me, Dame Gothel, how it happens that you are
so much heavier for me to draw up than the young King's son--he is with
me in a moment." "Ah! you wicked child," cried the enchantress, "what do
I hear you say! I thought I had separated you from all the world, and
yet you have deceived me!" In her anger she clutched Rapunzel's
beautiful tresses, wrapped them twice round her left hand, seized a pair
of scissors with the right, and snip, snip, they were cut off, and the
lovely braids lay on the ground. And she was so pitiless that she took
poor Rapunzel into a desert, where she had to live in great grief and
misery.

On the same day, however, that she cast out Rapunzel, the enchantress in
the evening fastened the braids of hair which she had cut off to the
hook of the window, and when the King's son came and cried,

  "Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
  Let down your hair,"

she let the hair down. The King's son ascended, but he did not find his
dearest Rapunzel above, but the enchantress, who gazed at him with
wicked and venomous looks. "Aha!" she cried mockingly. "You would fetch
your dearest, but the beautiful bird sits no longer singing in the nest;
the cat has got it, and will scratch out your eyes as well. Rapunzel is
lost to you; you will never see her more." The King's son was beside
himself with pain, and in his despair he leapt down from the tower. He
escaped with his life, but the thorns into which he fell pierced his
eyes. Then he wandered quite blind about the forest, ate nothing but
roots and berries, and did nothing but lament and weep over the loss of
his dearest wife. Thus he roamed about  I in misery for some years, and
at length came to the desert where Rapunzel lived in wretchedness. He
heard a voice, and it seemed so familiar to him that he went towards it,
and when he approached, Rapunzel knew him and fell on his neck and wept.
Two of her tears wetted his eyes, and they grew clear again, and he
could see with them as before. He led her to his kingdom, where he was
joyfully received, and they lived for a long time afterwards, happy and
contented.




MOTHER HOLLE


There was once a widow who had two daughters--one of whom was pretty and
industrious, while the other was ugly and idle. But she was much fonder
of the ugly and idle one, because she was her own daughter; and the
other, who was a step-daughter, was obliged to do all the work, and be
the Cinderella of the house. Every day the poor girl had to sit by a
well, in the highway, and spin and spin till her fingers bled.

Now it happened that one day the shuttle was marked with her blood, so
she dipped it in the well, to wash the mark off; but it dropped out of
her hand and fell to the bottom. She began to weep, and ran to her
step-mother and told of the mishap. But she scolded her sharply, and was
so merciless as to say, "Since you have let the shuttle fall in, you
must fetch it out again."

So the girl went back to the well, and did not know what to do; and in
the sorrow of her heart she jumped into the well to get the shuttle. She
lost her senses; and when she awoke and came to herself again, she was
in a lovely meadow where the sun was shining and many thousands of
flowers were growing. Along this meadow she went, and at last came to a
baker's oven full of bread, and the bread cried out, "Oh, take me out!
take me out! or I shall burn; I have been baked a long time!" So she
went up to it, and took out all the loaves one after another with the
bread-shovel. After that she went on till she came to a tree covered
with apples, which called out to her, "Oh, shake me! shake me! we apples
are all ripe!" So she shook the tree till the apples fell like rain, and
went on shaking till they were all down, and when she had gathered them
into a heap, she went on her way.

At last she came to a little house, out of which an old woman peeped;
but she had such large teeth that the girl was frightened, and was about
to run away.

But the old woman called out to her, "What are you afraid of, dear
child? Stay with me; if you will do all the work in the house properly,
you shall be the better for it. Only you must take care to make my bed
well, and to shake it thoroughly till the feathers fly--for then there
is snow on the earth. I am Mother Holle."

As the old woman spoke so kindly to her, the girl took courage and
agreed to enter her service. She attended to everything to the
satisfaction of her mistress, and always shook her bed so vigorously
that the feathers flew about like snow-flakes. So she had a pleasant
life with her; never an angry word; and boiled or roast meat every day.

She stayed some time with Mother Holle, and then she became sad. At
first she did not know what was the matter with her, but found at length
that it was homesickness; although she was many times better off here
than at home, still she had a longing to be there. At last she said to
the old woman, "I have a longing for home; and however well off I am
down here, I cannot stay any longer; I must go up again to my own
people." Mother Holle said, "I am pleased that you long for your home
again, and as you have served me so truly, I myself will take you up
again." Thereupon she took her by the hand, and led her to a large door.
The door was opened, and just as the maiden was standing beneath the
doorway, a heavy shower of golden rain fell, and all the gold remained
sticking to her, so that she was completely covered with it.

"You shall have that because you are so industrious," said Mother Holle;
and at the same time she gave her back the shuttle which she had let
fall into the well. Thereupon the door closed, and the maiden found
herself up above upon the earth, not far from her mother's house.

And as she went into the yard the cock cried: "Cock-a-doodle-doo! Your
golden girl's come back to you!"

So she went in to her mother, and as she arrived thus covered with gold,
she was well received, both by her and her sister.

The girl told all that had happened to her; and as soon as the mother
heard how she had come by so much wealth, she was very anxious to obtain
the same good luck for the ugly and lazy daughter. She had to seat
herself by the well and spin; and in order that her shuttle might be
stained with blood, she stuck her hand into a thorn-bush and pricked her
finger. Then she threw her shuttle into the well, and jumped in after
it.

She came, like the other, to the beautiful meadow and walked along the
very same path. When she got to the oven the bread again cried, "Oh,
take me out! take me out! or I shall burn; I have been baked a long
time!" But the lazy thing answered, "As if I had any wish to make myself
dirty!" and on she went. Soon she came to the apple-tree, which cried,
"Oh, shake me! shake me! we apples are all ripe!" But she answered, "I
like that! one of you might fall on my head," and so went on.

When she came to Mother Holle's house she was not afraid, for she had
already heard of her big teeth, and she hired herself to her
immediately.

The first day she forced herself to work diligently, and obeyed Mother
Holle when she told her to do anything, for she was thinking of all the
gold that she would give her. But on the second day she began to be
lazy, and on the third day still more so, and then she would not get up
in the morning at all. Neither did she make Mother Holle's bed as she
ought, and did not shake it so as to make the feathers fly up. Mother
Holle was soon tired of this, and gave her notice to leave. The lazy
girl was willing enough to go, and thought that now the golden rain
would come. Mother Holle led her, too, to the great door; but while she
was standing beneath it, instead of the gold a big kettleful of pitch
was emptied over her. "That is the reward of your service," said Mother
Holle, and shut the door.

So the lazy girl went home; but she was quite covered with pitch, and
the cock by the well-side, as soon as he saw her, cried:
"Cock-a-doodle-doo! Your pitchy girl's come back to you." But the pitch
stuck fast to her, and could not be got off as long as she lived.




THE FROG PRINCE


In the olden time, when wishing was having, there lived a King, whose
daughters were all beautiful; but the youngest was so exceedingly
beautiful that the Sun himself, although he saw her very, very often,
was delighted every time she came out into the sunshine.

Near the castle of this King was a large and gloomy forest, where in the
midst stood an old lime-tree, beneath whose branches splashed a little
fountain; so, whenever it was very hot, the King's youngest daughter ran
off into this wood, and sat down by the side of the fountain; and, when
she felt dull, would often divert herself by throwing a golden ball up
into the air and catching it again. And this was her favorite amusement.

Now, one day it happened that this golden ball, when the King's daughter
threw it into the air, did not fall down into her hand, but on to the
grass; and then it rolled right into the fountain. The King's daughter
followed the ball with her eyes, but it disappeared beneath the water,
which was so deep that she could not see to the bottom. Then she began
to lament, and to cry more loudly and more loudly; and, as she cried, a
voice called out, "Why weepest thou, O King's daughter? thy tears would
melt even a stone to pity." She looked around to the spot whence the
voice came, and saw a frog stretching his thick, ugly head out of the
water. "Ah! you old water-paddler," said she, "was it you that spoke? I
am weeping for my golden ball which bounced away from me into the
water."

"Be quiet, and do not cry," replied the Frog; "I can give thee good
assistance. But what wilt thou give me if I succeed in fetching thy
plaything up again?"

"What would you like, dear Frog?" said she. "My dresses, my pearls and
jewels, or the golden crown which I wear?"

The Frog replied, "Dresses, or jewels, or golden crowns, are not for me;
but if thou wilt love me, and let me be thy companion and playmate, and
sit at thy table, and eat from thy little golden plate, and drink out of
thy cup, and sleep in thy little bed,--if thou wilt promise me all these
things, then I will dive down and fetch up thy golden ball."

"Oh, I will promise you all," said she, "if you will only get me my
golden ball." But she thought to herself, "What is the silly Frog
chattering about? Let him stay in the water with his equals; he cannot
enter into society." Then the Frog, as soon as he had received her
promise, drew his head under the water and dived down. Presently he swam
up again with the golden ball in his mouth, and threw it on to the
grass. The King's daughter was full of joy when she again saw her
beautiful plaything; and, taking it up, she ran off immediately. "Stop!
stop!" cried the Frog; "take me with thee. I cannot run as thou canst."

But this croaking was of no avail; although it was loud enough, the
King's daughter did not hear it, but, hastening home, soon forgot the
poor Frog, who was obliged to leap back into the fountain.

The next day, when the King's daughter was sitting at table with her
father and all his courtiers, and was eating from her own little golden
plate, something was heard coming up the marble stairs, splish-splash,
splish-splash; and when it arrived at the top, it knocked at the door,
and a voice said--

"Open the door, thou youngest daughter of the King!"

So she arose and went to see who it was that called to her; but when she
opened the door and caught sight of the Frog, she shut it again very
quickly and with great passion, and sat down at the table, looking
exceedingly pale.

But the King perceived that her heart was beating violently, and asked
her whether it were a giant who had come to fetch her away who stood at
the door. "Oh, no!" answered she; "it is no giant, but an ugly Frog."

"What does the Frog want with you?" said the King.

"Oh, dear father, yesterday when I was playing by the fountain, my
golden ball fell into the water, and this Frog fetched it up again
because I cried so much: but first, I must tell you, he pressed me so
much, that I promised him he should be my companion. I never thought
that he could come out of the water, but somehow he has managed to jump
out, and now he wants to come in here."

At that moment there was another knock, and a voice said--

  "King's daughter, youngest,
    Open the door.
  Hast thou forgotten
    Thy promises made
  At the fountain so clear
    'Neath the lime-tree's shade?
  King's daughter, youngest.
    Open the door."

Then the King said, "What you have promised, that you must perform; go
and let him in." So the King's daughter went and opened the door, and
the Frog hopped in after her right up to her chair: and as soon as she
was seated, he said, "Lift me up;" but she hesitated so long that the
King had to order her to obey. And as soon as the Frog sat on the chair
he jumped on to the table and said, "Now push thy plate near me, that we
may eat together." And she did so, but as every one noticed, very
unwillingly. The Frog seemed to relish his dinner very much, but every
bit that the King's daughter ate nearly choked her, till at last the
Frog said, "I have satisfied my hunger, and feel very tired; wilt thou
carry me upstairs now into thy chamber, and make thy bed ready that we
may sleep together?" At this speech the King's daughter began to cry,
for she was afraid of the cold Frog, and dared not touch him; and
besides, he actually wanted to sleep in her own beautiful, clean bed!

But her tears only made the King very angry, and he said, "He who helped
you in the time of your trouble must not now be despised!" So she took
the Frog up with two fingers, and put him into a corner of her chamber.
But as she lay in her bed, he crept up to it, and said, "I am so very
tired that I shall sleep well; do take me up, or I will tell thy
father." This speech put the King's daughter into a terrible passion,
and catching the Frog up, she threw him with all her strength against
the wall, saying "Now will you be quiet, you ugly Frog!"

But as he fell he was changed from a Frog into a handsome Prince with
beautiful eyes, who after a little while became her dear companion and
betrothed. One morning, Henry, trusted servant of the Prince, came for
them with a carriage. When his master was changed into a frog, trusty
Henry had grieved so much that he had bound three iron bands around his
heart, for fear it should break with grief and sorrow. The faithful
Henry (who was also the trusty Henry) helped in the bride and
bridegroom, and placed himself in the seat behind, full of joy at his
master's release. They had not proceeded far when the Prince heard a
crack as if something had broken behind the carriage; so he put his head
out of the window and asked trusty Henry what was broken, and faithful
Henry answered, "It was not the carriage, my master, but an iron band
which I bound around my heart when it was in such grief because you were
changed into a frog."

Twice afterwards on the journey there was the same noise, and each time
the Prince thought that it was some part of the carriage that had given
way; but it was only the breaking of the bands which bound the heart of
the trusty Henry (who was also the faithful Henry), and who was
thenceforward free and happy.




THE TRAVELS OF TOM THUMB


There lived a tailor who had only one son, and he was extremely small,
not any larger than your thumb, and so was called Tom Thumb.

However, he was a courageous little fellow, and he told his father,
"Father, I am determined to go into the world to seek my fortune."

"Very well, my son," answered the old man, and taking a big darning
needle, he made a top to it of sealing wax, and gave it to Tom Thumb,
saying:

"There is a sword for you to use to defend yourself on your
journeyings."

Then the little fellow, desiring to dine once more with his parents,
popped into the kitchen to find out what his mother was preparing for
his last dinner at home. All the dishes were ready to be taken in, and
they were standing upon the hearth.

"What is it you have for dinner, dear mother?" he inquired.

"You can look for yourself," she replied.

Then Tom sprang up on to the hob, and peeped into all the dishes, but
over one he leant so far, that he was carried up by the steam through
the chimney, and then for some distance he floated on the smoke, but
after a while he fell upon the ground once more.

Now, at last, Tom Thumb was really out in the wide world, and he went on
cheerily, and after a time was engaged by a master tailor; but here the
food was not so good as his mother's, and it was not to his taste.

So he said, "Mistress, if you will not give me better things to eat, I
shall chalk upon your door, 'Too many potatoes, and not enough meat.
Good-bye, potato-mill.'"

"I should like to know what you want, you little grasshopper!" cried the
woman very angrily, and she seized a shred of cloth to strike him;
however, the tiny tailor popped under a thimble, and from it he peeped,
putting out his tongue at the mistress.

So she took up the thimble, meaning to catch him, but Tom Thumb hid
himself amongst the shreds of cloth, and when she began to search
through those, he slipped into a crack in the table, but put out his
head to laugh at her; so she tried again to hit him with the shred, but
did not succeed in doing so, for he slipped through the crack into the
table drawer.

At last, though, he was caught, and driven out of the house.

So the little fellow continued his travels, and presently entering a
thick forest, he encountered a company of robbers who were plotting to
steal the king's treasure.

As soon as they saw the little tailor, they said to themselves, "A
little fellow like this could creep through a keyhole, and aid us
greatly." So one called out--

"Hullo, little man, will you come with us to the king's treasury?
Certainly a Goliath like you could creep in with ease, and throw out the
coins to us."

After considering awhile, Tom Thumb consented, and accompanied them to
the king's treasury.

From top to bottom they inspected the door to discover a crack large
enough for him to get through, and soon found one. He was for going in
directly, but one of the sentinels happening to catch sight of him,
exclaimed: "Here is indeed an ugly spider; I will crush it with my
foot."

"Leave the poor creature alone," the other said; "it has not done you
any harm."

So Tom Thumb slipped through the crack, and made his way to the
treasury. Then he opened the window, and cast out the coins to the
robbers who were waiting below. While the little tailor was engaged in
this exciting employment, he heard the king coming to inspect his
treasure, so as quickly as possible he crept out of sight. The king
noticed that his treasure had been disarranged, and soon observed that
coins were missing: but he was utterly unable to think how they could
have been stolen, for the locks and bolts had not been tampered with,
and everything was well fastened.

On going from the treasury, he warned the two sentinels, saying--

"Be on the watch, some one is after the money," and quite soon, on Tom
Thumb setting to work again, they heard very clearly the coins ringing,
chink, chank, as they struck one against the other.

As quickly as possible they unfastened the building and went in, hoping
to take the thief.

But Tom Thumb was too quick for them, he sprang into a corner, and
hiding himself behind a coin, so that nothing of him was visible, he
made fun of the sentinels; crying "I am here!" Then when the men hurried
to the spot where the voice came from, he was no longer there, but from
a different place cried out: "Ha, Ha! here I am!"

So the sentinels kept jumping about, but so cleverly did Tom move from
one spot to another, that they were obliged to run around the whole
time, hoping to find somebody, until at length, quite tired out, they
went off.

Then Tomb Thumb went on with his work, and one after another he threw
all the coins out of the window, but the very last he sounded and rang
with all his might and springing nimbly upon it, so flew through the
window.

The robbers were loud in their praises.

"Indeed you are a brave fellow," they said, "will you be our captain?"

Tom Thumb, thanking them, declined this honor, for he was anxious to see
more of the world. Then the booty was apportioned out, but only a ducat
was given to the little tailor, for that was as much as he could carry.

So Tom girded on his sword again, and bidding farewell to the robbers,
continued his travels.

He tried to get work under various masters, but they would have nothing
to do with him, so after a while he took service at an inn. But the
maids there disliked him, for he was about everywhere, and saw all that
went on, without being seen himself; and he told their mistress of their
dishonest ways, of what was taken off the plates, and from out the
cellars.

So they threatened they would drown him, if they caught him, and
determined to do him some harm. Then, one day, a maid mowing in the
garden saw Tom Thumb running in and out between the blades of grass, so
she cut the grass, in great haste, just where he chanced to be, tied it
all in a bundle, and, without anyone knowing, threw it to the cows.

Then one big black cow took up a mouthful of grass directly, with Tom in
it, and swallowed it down; without doing him any damage, however.

But Tom did not approve of his position, for it was pitch dark down
there, with no light burning.

When milking time came, he shouted--

  "Drip, drap, drop,
  Will the milking soon stop?"

but the sound of the milk trickling into the pail prevented his voice
being heard.

Not long afterwards the master came into the shed, and said:

"I will have that cow killed to-morrow."

This put Tom Thumb into a great fright, and he called out loudly:

"Please let me out, here I am inside."

This the master heard plainly enough, but could not make out where the
voice came from.

"Where are you?" he inquired.

"In the black cow," was the reply.

However, the master could not understand what was meant, and so went
away.

The following morning the cow was killed, but fortunately in the cutting
up the knife did not touch Tom Thumb, who was put aside with the meat
that was to be made into sausages.

When the butcher began chopping, he cried as loudly as he could--

"Don't chop far, I am down beneath," but the chopper made so much noise,
that he attracted no attention.

It was indeed a terrible situation for poor Tom. But being in danger
brightens one's wits, and he sprang so nimbly, this way and that,
keeping clear of the chopper, that not a blow struck him, and he did not
get even a scratch.

However, he could not escape, there was no help for it, he was forced
into a skin with the sausage meat, so was compelled to make himself as
comfortable as might be. It was very close quarters, and besides that,
the sausages were suspended to smoke in the chimney, which was by no
means entertaining, and the time passed slowly.

When winter came, he was taken down for a guest's meal, and while the
hostess was slicing the sausage he had to be on his guard, lest if he
stretched out his head it might be cut off.

Watching his opportunity, at last he was able to jump out of the
sausage, and right glad was he to be once again in the company of his
fellow-men.

It was not very long, however, that he stayed in this house, where he
had been met by so many misfortunes, and again he set forth on his
travels, rejoicing in his freedom, but this did not long continue.

Swiftly running across the field came a fox, who, in an instant, had
snapped up poor little Tom.

"Oh, Mr. Fox," called out the little tailor, "it is I who am in your
throat; please let me out."

"Certainly," answered Reynard, "you are not a bit better than nothing at
all, you don't in the least satisfy me; make me a promise, that I shall
have the hens in your father's yard, and you shall regain your liberty."

"Willingly, you shall have all the hens; I make you a faithful promise,"
responded Tom Thumb.

So the fox coughed and set him free, and himself carried Tom home.

Then when the father had his dear little son once more he gave the fox
all his hens, with the greatest of pleasure.

"Here, father, I am bringing you a golden coin from my travels," said
the little fellow, and he brought out the ducat the thieves had
apportioned to him.

"But how was it that the fox was given all the poor little hens?"

"Foolish little one, don't you think your father would rather have you,
than all the hens he ever had in his yard?"




SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED


A poor widow once lived in a little cottage. In front of the cottage was
a garden, in which were growing two rose trees; one of these bore white
roses, and the other red.

She had two children, who resembled the rose trees. One was called
Snow-White, and the other Rose-Red; and they were as religious and
loving, busy and untiring, as any two children ever were.

Snow-White was more gentle, and quieter than her sister, who liked
better skipping about the fields, seeking flowers, and catching summer
birds; while Snow-White stayed at home with her mother, either helping
her in her work, or, when that was done, reading aloud.

The two children had the greatest affection the one for the other. They
were always seen hand in hand; and should Snow-White say to her sister,
"We will never separate," the other would reply, "Not while we live,"
the mother adding, "That which one has, let her always share with the
other."

They constantly ran together in the woods, collecting ripe berries; but
not a single animal would have injured them; quite the reverse, they all
felt the greatest esteem for the young creatures. The hare came to eat
parsley from their hands, the deer grazed by their side, the stag
bounded past them unheeding; the birds, likewise, did not stir from the
bough, but sang in entire security. No mischance befell them; if
benighted in the wood, they lay down on the moss to repose and sleep
till the morning; and their mother was satisfied as to their safety, and
felt no fear about them.

Once, when they had spent the night in the wood, and the bright sunrise
awoke them, they saw a beautiful child, in a snow-white robe, shining
like diamonds, sitting close to the spot where they had reposed. She
arose when they opened their eyes, and looked kindly at them; but said
no word, and passed from their sight into the wood. When the children
looked around they saw they had been sleeping on the edge of a
precipice, and would surely have fallen over if they had gone forward
two steps further in the darkness. Their mother said the beautiful child
must have been the angel who keeps watch over good children.

Snow-White and Rose-Red kept their mother's cottage so clean that it
gave pleasure only to look in. In summer-time Rose-Red attended to the
house, and every morning, before her mother awoke, placed by her bed a
bouquet which had in it a rose from each of the rose-trees. In
winter-time Snow-White set light to the fire, and put on the kettle,
after polishing it until it was like gold for brightness. In the
evening, when snow was falling, her mother would bid her bolt the door,
and then, sitting by the hearth, the good widow would read aloud to them
from a big book while the little girls were spinning. Close by them lay
a lamb, and a white pigeon, with its head tucked under its wing, was on
a perch behind.

One evening, as they were all sitting cosily together like this, there
was a knock at the door, as if someone wished to come in.

"Make haste, Rose-Red!" said her mother; "open the door; it is surely
some traveller seeking shelter." Rose-Red accordingly pulled back the
bolt, expecting to see some poor man. But it was nothing of the kind; it
was a bear, that thrust his big, black head in at the open door.
Rose-Red cried out and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dove fluttered
her wings, and Snow-White hid herself behind her mother's bed. The bear
began speaking, and said, "Do not be afraid; I will not do you any harm;
I am half-frozen and would like to warm myself a little at your fire."

"Poor bear!" the mother replied; "come in and lie by the fire; only be
careful that your hair is not burnt." Then she called Snow-White and
Rose-Red, telling them that the bear was kind, and would not harm them.
They came, as she bade them, and presently the lamb and the dove drew
near also without fear.

"Children," begged the bear; "knock some of the snow off my coat." So
they brought the broom and brushed the bear's coat quite clean.

After that he stretched himself out in front of the fire, and pleased
himself by growling a little, only to show that he was happy and
comfortable. Before long they were all quite good friends, and the
children began to play with their unlooked-for visitor, pulling his
thick fur, or placing their feet on his back, or rolling him over and
over. Then they took a slender hazel-twig, using it upon his thick coat,
and they laughed when he growled. The bear permitted them to amuse
themselves in this way, only occasionally calling out, when it went a
little too far, "Children, spare me an inch of life."

When it was night, and all were making ready to go to bed, the widow
told the bear, "You may stay here and lie by the hearth, if you like, so
that you will be sheltered from the cold and from the bad weather."

The offer was accepted, but when morning came, as the day broke in the
east, the two children let him out, and over the snow he went back into
the wood.

After this, every evening at the same time the bear came, lay by the
fire, and allowed the children to play with him; so they became quite
fond of their curious playmate, and the door was not ever bolted in the
evening until he had appeared.

When spring-time came, and all around began to look green and bright,
one morning the bear said to Snow-White, "Now I must leave you, and all
the summer long I shall not be able to come back."

"Where, then, are you going, dear Bear?" asked Snow-White.

"I have to go to the woods to protect my treasure from the bad dwarfs.
In winter-time, when the earth is frozen hard, they must remain
underground, and cannot make their way through: but now that the
sunshine has thawed the earth they can come to the surface, and whatever
gets into their hands, or is brought to their caves, seldom, if ever,
again sees daylight."

Snow-White was very sad when she said good-bye to the good-natured
beast, and unfastened the door, that he might go; but in going out he
was caught by a hook in the lintel, and a scrap of his fur being torn,
Snow-White thought there was something shining like gold through the
rent: but he went out so quickly that she could not feel certain what it
was, and soon he was hidden among the trees.

One day the mother sent her children into the wood to pick up sticks.
They found a big tree lying on the ground. It had been felled, and
towards the roots they noticed something skipping and springing, which
they could not make out, as it was sometimes hidden in the grasses. As
they came nearer they could see it was a dwarf, with a shrivelled-up
face and a snow-white beard an ell long. The beard was fixed in a gash
in the tree trunk, and the tiny fellow was hopping to and fro, like a
dog at the end of a string, but he could not manage to free himself. He
stared at the children with his red, fiery eyes, and called out, "Why
are you standing there? Can't you come and try to help me?"

"What were you doing, little fellow?" inquired Rose-Red.

"Stupid, inquisitive goose!" replied the dwarf; "I meant to split the
trunk, so that I could chop it up for kitchen sticks; big logs would
burn up the small quantity of food we cook, for people like us do not
consume great heaps of food, as you heavy, greedy folk do. The bill-hook
I had driven in, and soon I should have done what I required; but the
tool suddenly sprang from the cleft, which so quickly shut up again that
it caught my handsome white beard; and here I must stop, for I cannot
set myself free. You stupid pale-faced creatures! You laugh, do you?"

In spite of the dwarf's bad temper, the girls took all possible pains to
release the little man, but without avail, the beard could not be moved,
it was wedged too tightly.

"I will run and get someone else," said Rose-Red.

"Idiot!" cried the dwarf. "Who would go and get more people? Already
there are two too many. Can't you think of something better?"

"Don't be so impatient," said Snow-White. "I will try to think." She
clapped her hands as if she had discovered a remedy, took out her
scissors, and in a moment set the dwarf free by cutting off the end of
his beard.

Immediately the dwarf felt that he was free he seized a sack full of
gold that was hidden amongst the tree's roots, and, lifting it up,
grumbled out, "Clumsy creatures, to cut off a bit of my beautiful beard,
of which I am so proud! I leave the cuckoos to pay you for what you
did." Saying this, he swung the sack across his shoulder, and went off,
without even casting a glance at the children.

Not long afterwards the two sisters went to angle in the brook, meaning
to catch fish for dinner. As they were drawing near the water they
perceived something, looking like a large grasshopper, springing towards
the stream, as if it were going in. They hurried up to see what it might
be, and found that it was the dwarf. "Where are you going?" said
Rose-Red. "Surely you will not jump into the water?"

"I'm not such a simpleton as that!" yelled the little man. "Don't you
see that a wretch of a fish is pulling me in?"

The dwarf had been sitting angling from the side of the stream when, by
ill-luck, the wind had entangled his beard in his line, and just
afterwards a big fish taking the bait, the unamiable little fellow had
not sufficient strength to pull it out; so the fish had the advantage,
and was dragging the dwarf after it. Certainly, he caught at every stalk
and spray near him, but that did not assist him greatly; he was forced
to follow all the twistings of the fish, and was perpetually in danger
of being drawn into the brook.

The girls arrived just in time. They caught hold of him firmly and
endeavored to untwist his beard from the line, but in vain; they were
too tightly entangled. There was nothing left but again to make use of
the scissors; so they were taken out, and the tangled portion was cut
off.

When the dwarf noticed what they were about, he exclaimed in a great
rage, "Is this how you damage my beard? Not content with making it
shorter before, you are now making it still smaller, and completely
spoiling it. I shall not ever dare show my face to my friends. I wish
you had missed your way before you took this road." Then he fetched a
sack of pearls that lay among the rushes, and, not saying another word,
hobbled off and disappeared behind a large stone.

Soon after this it chanced that the poor widow sent her children to the
town to purchase cotton, needles, ribbon, and tape. The way to the town
ran over a common, on which in every direction large masses of rocks
were scattered about. The children's attention was soon attracted to a
big bird that hovered in the air. They remarked that, after circling
slowly for a time, and gradually getting nearer to the ground, it all of
a sudden pounced down amongst a mass of rock. Instantly a heartrending
cry reached their ears, and, running quickly to the place, they saw,
with horror, that the eagle had seized their former acquaintance, the
dwarf, and was just about to carry him off. The kind children did not
hesitate for an instant. They took a firm hold of the little man, and
strove so stoutly with the eagle for possession of his contemplated
prey, that, after much rough treatment on both sides, the dwarf was left
in the hands of his brave little friends, and the eagle took to flight.

As soon as the little man had in some measure recovered from his alarm,
his small squeaky, cracked voice was heard saying, "Couldn't you have
held me more gently? See my little coat; you have rent and damaged it in
a fine manner, you clumsy, officious things!" Then he picked up a sack
of jewels, and slipped out of sight behind a piece of rock.

The maidens by this time were quite used to his ungrateful, ungracious
ways; so they took no notice of it, but went on their way, made their
purchases, and then were ready to return to their happy home.

On their way back, suddenly, once more they ran across their dwarf
friend. Upon a clear space he had turned out his sack of jewels,  so
that he could count and admire them, for he had not imagined that
anybody would at so late an hour be coming across the common.

The setting sun was shining upon the brilliant stones, and their
changing hues and sparkling rays caused the children to pause to admire
them also.

"What are you gazing at?"  cried the dwarf,  at the same time becoming
red with rage;  "and what are you standing there for,  making ugly
faces?"  It is probable that he might have proceeded in the same
complimentary manner,  but suddenly a great growl was heard near by
them,  and a big black bear joined the party.  Up jumped the dwarf in
extremest terror,  but could not get to his hiding-place,  the bear was
too close to him;  so he cried out in very evident anguish--

"Dear Mr. Bear,  forgive me,  I pray!  I will render to you all my
treasure.  Just see those precious stones lying there! Grant me my life!
What would you do with such an insignificant little fellow? You would
not notice me between your teeth.  See,  though,  those two children,
they would be delicate morsels,  and are as plump as partridges;  I beg
of you to take them,  good Mr. Bear,  and let me go!"

But the bear would not be moved by his speeches. He gave the
ill-disposed creature a blow with his paw,  and he lay lifeless on the
ground.

Meanwhile the maidens were running away,  making off for home as well as
they could;  but all of a sudden they were stopped by a well-known voice
that called out,  "Snow-White, Rose-Red,  stay!  Do not fear.  I will
accompany you."

The bear quickly came towards them, but, as he reached their side,
suddenly the bear-skin slipped to the ground,  and there before them was
standing a handsome man,  completely garmented in gold, who  said--

"I am a king's son,  who was enchanted by the wicked dwarf lying over
there.  He stole my treasure,  and compelled me to roam the woods
transformed into a big bear until his death should set me free.
Therefore he has only received a well-deserved punishment."

Some time afterwards Snow-White married the Prince,  and Rose-Red his
brother.

They shared between them the enormous treasure which the dwarf had
collected in his cave.

The old mother spent many happy years with her children.




THE THREE LITTLE MEN IN THE WOOD


Once upon a time there lived a man, whose wife had died; and a woman,
also, who had lost her husband: and this man and this woman had each a
daughter. These two maidens were friendly with each other, and used to
walk together, and one day they came by the widow's house. Then the
widow said to the man's daughter, "Do you hear, tell your father I wish
to marry him, and you shall every morning wash in milk and drink wine,
but my daughter shall wash in water and drink water." So the girl went
home and told her father what the woman had said, and he replied, "What
shall I do? Marriage is a comfort, but it is also a torment." At last,
as he could come to no conclusion, he drew off his boot and said: "Take
this boot, which has a hole in the sole, and go with it out of doors and
hang it on the great nail and then pour water into it. If it holds the
water, I will again take a wife; but if it runs through, I will not have
her." The girl did as he bid her, but the water drew the hole together
and the boot became full to overflowing. So she told her father how it
had happened, and he, getting up, saw it was quite true; and going to
the widow he settled the matter, and the wedding was celebrated.

The next morning, when the two girls arose, milk to wash in and wine to
drink were set for the man's daughter, but only water, both for washing
and drinking, for the woman's daughter. The second morning, water for
washing and drinking stood before both the man's daughter and the
woman's; and on the third morning, water to wash in and water to drink
were set before the man's daughter, and milk to wash in and wine to
drink before the woman's daughter, and so it continued.

Soon the woman conceived a deadly hatred for her step-daughter, and knew
not how to behave badly enough to her from day to day. She was envious,
too, because her step-daughter was beautiful and lovely, and her own
daughter was ugly and hateful.

Once, in the winter-time, when the river was frozen as hard as a stone,
and hill and valley were covered with snow, the woman made a cloak of
paper, and called the maiden to her and said, "Put on this cloak, and go
away into the wood to fetch me a little basketful of strawberries, for I
have a wish for some."

"Mercy on us!" said the maiden, "in winter there are no strawberries
growing; the ground is frozen, and the snow, too, has covered
everything. And why must I go in that paper cloak? It is so cold out of
doors that it freezes one's breath even, and if the wind does not blow
off this cloak, the thorns will tear it from my body."

"Will you dare to contradict me?" said the step-mother. "Make haste off,
and let me not see you again until you have found me a basket of
strawberries." Then she gave her a small piece of dry bread, saying, "On
that you must subsist the whole day." But she thought--out of doors she
will be frozen and starved, so that my eyes will never see her again!

So the girl did as she was told, and put on the paper cloak, and went
away with the basket. Far and near there was nothing but snow, and not a
green blade was to be seen. When she came to the forest she discovered a
little cottage, out of which three little Dwarfs were peeping. The girl
wished them good morning, and knocked gently at the door. They called
her in, and entering the room, she sat down on a bench by the fire to
warm herself, and eat her breakfast. The Dwarfs called out, "Give us
some of it!" "Willingly," she replied, and, dividing her bread in two,
she gave them half. They asked, "What do you here in the forest, in the
winter-time, in this thin cloak?"

"Ah!" she answered, "I must, seek a basketful of strawberries, and I
dare not return home until I can take them with me." When she had eaten
her bread, they gave her a broom, saying, "Sweep away the snow with this
from the back door." But when she was gone out of doors the three Dwarfs
said one to another, "What shall we give her, because she is so gentle
and good, and has shared her bread with us?" Then said the first, "I
grant to her that she shall become more beautiful every day." The second
said, "I grant that a piece of gold shall fall out of her mouth for
every word she speaks." The third said, "I grant that a King shall come
and make her his bride."

Meanwhile, the girl had done as the Dwarf had bidden her, and had swept
away the snow from behind the house. And what do you think she found
there? Actually, ripe strawberries! which came quite red and sweet up
under the snow. So filling her basket in great glee, she thanked the
little men and gave them each her hand, and then ran home to take her
step-mother what she wished for. As she went in and said "Good evening,"
a piece of gold fell from her mouth. Thereupon she related what had
happened to her in the forest; but at every word she spoke a piece of
gold fell, so that the whole floor was covered.

"Just see her arrogance," said the step-sister, "to throw away money in
that way!" but in her heart she was jealous, and wished to go into the
forest, too, to seek strawberries. Her mother said, "No, my dear
daughter; it is too cold, you will be frozen!" but as her girl let her
have no peace, she at last consented, and made her a beautiful fur cloak
to put on; she also gave her buttered bread and cooked meat to eat on
her way.

The girl went into the forest and came straight to the little cottage.
The three Dwarfs were peeping out again, but she did not greet them;
and, stumbling on without looking at them, or speaking, she entered the
room, and, seating herself by the fire, began to eat the bread and
butter and meat. "Give us some of that," exclaimed the Dwarfs; but she
answered, "I have not got enough for myself, so how can I give any
away?" When she had finished they said, "You have a broom there, go and
sweep the back door clean." "Oh, sweep it yourself," she replied; "I am
not your servant." When she saw that they would not give her anything
she went out at the door, and the three Dwarfs said to each other, "What
shall we give her? She is so ill-behaved, and has such a bad and envious
disposition, that nobody can wish well to her." The first said, "I grant
that she becomes more ugly every day." The second said, "I grant that at
every word she speaks a toad shall spring out of her mouth." The third
said, "I grant that she shall die a miserable death." Meanwhile the girl
had been looking for strawberries out of doors, but as she could find
none she went home very peevish. When she opened her mouth to tell her
mother what had happened to her in the forest, a toad jumped out of her
mouth at each word, so that every one fled away from her in horror.

The step-mother was now still more vexed, and was always thinking how
she could do the most harm to her husband's daughter, who every day
became more beautiful. At last she took a kettle, set it on the fire,
and boiled a net therein. When it was sodden she hung it on the shoulder
of the poor girl, and gave her an axe, that she might go upon the frozen
pond and cut a hole in the ice to drag the net. She obeyed, and went
away and cut an ice-hole; and while she was cutting, an elegant carriage
came by, in which the King sat. The carriage stopped, and the King
asked, "My child, who are you? and what do you here?" "I am a poor girl,
and am dragging a net," said she. Then the King pitied her, and saw how
beautiful she was, and said, "Will you go with me?" "Yes, indeed, with
all my heart," she replied, for she was glad to get out of the sight of
her mother and sister.

So she was handed into the carriage, and driven away with the King; and
as soon as they arrived at his castle the wedding was celebrated with
great splendor, as the Dwarfs had granted to the maiden. After a year
the young Queen bore a son; and when the step-mother heard of her great
good fortune, she came to the castle with her daughter, and behaved as
if she had come on a visit. But one day when the King had gone out, and
no one was present, this bad woman seized the Queen by the head, and her
daughter caught hold of her feet, and raising her out of bed, they threw
her out of the window into the river which ran past. Then, laying her
ugly daughter in the bed, the old woman covered her up, even over her
head; and when the King came back he wished to speak to his wife, but
the old woman exclaimed, "Softly! softly! do not go near her; she is
lying in a beautiful sleep, and must be kept quiet to-day." The King,
not thinking of an evil design, came again the next morning the first
thing; and when he spoke to his wife, and she answered, a toad sprang
out of her mouth at every word, as a piece of gold had done before. So
he asked what had happened, and the old woman said, "That is produced by
her weakness, she will soon lose it again."

But in the night the kitchen-boy saw a Duck swimming through the brook,
and the Duck asked:

  "King, King, what are you doing?
  Are you sleeping, or are you waking?"

And as he gave no answer, the Duck said:

  "What are my guests a-doing?"

Then the boy answered:

  "They all sleep sound."

And she asked him:

  "How fares my child?"

And he replied:

  "In his cradle he sleeps."

Then she came up in the form of the Queen to the cradle, and gave the
child drink, shook up his bed, and covered him up, and then swam away
again as a duck through the brook. The second night she came again; and
on the third she said to the kitchen-boy, "Go and tell the King to take
his sword, and swing it thrice over me, on the threshold." Then the boy
ran and told the King, who came with his sword, and swung it thrice over
the Duck; and at the third time his bride stood before him, bright,
living, and healthful, as she had been before.

Now the King was in great happiness, but he hid the Queen in a chamber
until the Sunday when the child was to be christened; and when all was
finished he asked, "What ought to be done to one who takes another out
of a bed and throws her into the river?" "Nothing could be more proper,"
said the old woman, "than to put such a one into a cask, stuck round
with nails, and to roll it down the hill into the water." Then the King
said, "You have spoken your own sentence"; and ordering a cask to be
fetched, he caused the old woman and her daughter to be put into it, and
the bottom nailed up. Then the cask was rolled down the hill until it
fell into the water.




RUMPELSTILTSKIN


There was once a poor Miller who had a beautiful daughter, and one day,
having to go to speak with the King, he said, in order to make himself
appear of consequence, that he had a daughter who could spin straw into
gold. The King was very fond of gold, and thought to himself, "That is
an art which would please me very well"; and so he said to the Miller,
"If your daughter is so very clever, bring her to the castle in the
morning, and I will put her to the proof."

As soon as she arrived the King led her into a chamber which was full of
straw; and, giving her a wheel and a reel, he said, "Now set yourself to
work, and if you have not spun this straw into gold by an early hour
to-morrow, you must die." With these words he shut the room door, and
left the maiden alone.

There she sat for a long time, thinking how to save her life; for she
understood nothing of the art whereby straw might be spun into gold; and
her perplexity increased more and more, till at last she began to weep.
All at once the door opened, and in stepped a little Man, who said,
"Good evening, fair maiden; why do you weep so sore?" "Ah," she replied,
"I must spin this straw into gold, and I am sure I do not know how."

The little Man asked, "What will you give me if I spin it for you?"

"My necklace," said the maiden.

The Dwarf took it, placed himself in front of the wheel, and whirr,
whirr, whirr, three times round, and the bobbin was full. Then he set up
another, and whir, whir, whir, thrice round again, and a second bobbin
was full; and so he went all night long, until all the straw was spun,
and the bobbins were full of gold. At sunrise the King came, very much
astonished to see the gold; the sight of which gladdened him, but did
not make his heart less covetous. He caused the maiden to be led into
another room, still larger, full of straw; and then he bade her spin it
into gold during the night if she valued her life. The maiden was again
quite at a loss what to do; but while she cried the door opened
suddenly, as before, and the Dwarf appeared and asked her what she would
give him in return for his assistance. "The ring off my finger," she
replied. The little Man took the ring and began to spin at once, and by
morning all the straw was changed to glistening gold. The King was
rejoiced above measure at the sight of this, but still he was not
satisfied, but, leading the maiden into another still larger room, full
of straw as the others, he said, "This you must spin during the night;
but if you accomplish it you shall be my bride." "For," thought he to
himself, "a richer wife thou canst not have in all the world."

When the maiden was left alone, the Dwarf again appeared and asked, for
the third time, "What will you give me to do this for you?"

"I have nothing left that I can give you," replied the maiden.

"Then promise me your first-born child if you become Queen," said he.

The Miller's daughter thought, "Who can tell if that will ever happen?"
and, ignorant how else to help herself out of her trouble, she promised
the Dwarf what he desired; and he immediately set about and finished the
spinning. When morning came, and the King found all he had wished for
done, he celebrated his wedding, and the Miller's fair daughter became
Queen.

The gay times she had at the King's Court caused her to forget that she
had made a very foolish promise.

About a year after the marriage, when she had ceased to think about the
little Dwarf, she brought a fine child into the world; and, suddenly,
soon after its birth, the very man appeared and demanded what she had
promised. The frightened Queen offered him all the riches of the kingdom
if he would leave her her child; but the Dwarf answered, "No; something
human is dearer to me than all the wealth of the world."

The Queen began to weep and groan so much that the Dwarf pitied her, and
said, "I will leave you three days to consider; if you in that time
discover my name you shall keep your child."

All night long the Queen racked her brains for all the names she could
think of, and sent a messenger through the country to collect far and
wide any new names. The following morning came the Dwarf, and she began
with "Caspar," "Melchior," "Balthassar," and all the odd names she knew;
but at each the little Man exclaimed, "That is not my name." The second
day the Queen inquired of all her people for uncommon and curious names,
and called the Dwarf "Ribs-of-Beef," "Sheep-shank," "Whalebone," but at
each he said, "This is not my name." The third day the messenger came
back and said, "I have not found a single name; but as I came to a high
mountain near the edge of a forest, where foxes and hares say good night
to each other, I saw there a little house, and before the door a fire
was burning, and round this fire a very curious little Man was dancing
on one leg, and shouting:

  "'To-day I stew, and then I'll bake,
  To-morrow I shall the Queen's child take;
  Ah! how famous it is that nobody knows
  That my name is Rumpelstiltskin.'"

When the Queen heard this she was very glad, for now she knew the name;
and soon after came the Dwarf, and asked, "Now, my lady Queen, what is
my name?"

First she said, "Are you called Conrade?" "No."

"Are you called Hal?" "No."

"Are you called Rumpelstiltskin?"

"A witch has told you! a witch has told you!" shrieked the little Man,
and stamped his right foot so hard in the ground with rage that he could
not draw it out again. Then he took hold of his left leg with both his
hands, and pulled away so hard that his right came off in the struggle,
and he hopped away howling terribly. And from that day to this the Queen
has heard no more of her troublesome visitor.




LITTLE ONE-EYE, TWO-EYES AND THREE-EYES


Once upon a time there was a Woman, who had three daughters, the eldest
of whom was named One-Eye, because she had but a single eye, and that
placed in the middle of her forehead; the second was called Two-Eyes,
because she was like other mortals; and the third, Three-Eyes, because
she had three eyes, and one of them in the centre of her forehead, like
her eldest sister. But, because her second sister had nothing out of the
common in her appearance, she was looked down upon by her sisters, and
despised by her mother. "You are no better than common folk," they would
say to her; "you do not belong to us"; and then they would push her
about, give her coarse clothing, and nothing to eat but their leavings,
besides numerous other insults as occasion offered.

Once it happened that Two-Eyes had to go into the forest to tend the
goat; and she went very hungry, because her sisters had given her very
little to eat that morning. She sat down upon a hillock, and cried so
much that her tears flowed almost like rivers out of her eyes! By and by
she looked up and saw a Woman standing by, who asked, "Why are you
weeping, Two-Eyes?" "Because I have two eyes like ordinary people,"
replied the maiden, "and therefore my mother and sisters dislike me,
push me into corners, throw me their old clothes, and give me nothing to
eat but what they leave. To-day they have given me so little that I am
still hungry." "Dry your eyes, then, now," said the wise Woman; "I will
tell you something which shall prevent you from being hungry again. You
must say to your goat:

  "'Little kid, milk
  Table, appear!'

"and immediately a nicely filled table will stand before you, with
delicate food upon it, of which you can eat as much as you please. And
when you are satisfied, and have done with the table, you must say:

  'Little kid, milk
  Table, depart!'

"and it will disappear directly."

With these words the wise Woman went away, and little Two-Eyes thought
to herself she would try at once if what the Woman said were true, for
she felt very hungry indeed.

  "Little kid, milk
  Table, appear!"

said the maiden, and immediately a table covered with a white cloth
stood before her, with a knife and fork, and silver spoon; and the most
delicate dishes were ranged in order upon it, and everything as warm as
if they had been just taken away from the fire. Two-Eyes said a short
grace, and then began to eat; and when she had finished she pronounced
the words which the wise Woman had told her:

  "Little kid, milk
  Table, depart!"

and directly the table and all that was on it quickly disappeared. "This
is capital housekeeping," said the maiden, in high glee; and at evening
she went home with her goat, and found an earthen dish which her sisters
had left her filled with their leavings. She did not touch it; and the
next morning she went off again without taking the meagre breakfast
which was left out for her. The first and second time she did this the
sisters thought nothing of it; but when she did the same the third
morning their attention was roused, and they said, "All is not right
with Two-Eyes, for she has left her meals twice, and has touched nothing
of what was left for her; she must have found some other way of living."
So they determined that One-Eye should go with the maiden when she drove
the goat to the meadow and pay attention to what passed, and observe
whether any one brought her to eat or to drink.

When Two-Eyes, therefore, was about to set off, One-Eye told her she was
going with her to see whether she took proper care of the goat and fed
her sufficiently. Two-Eyes, however, divined her sister's object, and
drove the goat where the grass was finest, and then said, "Come,
One-Eye, let us sit down, and I will sing to you." So One-Eye sat down,
for she was quite tired with her unusual walk and the heat of the sun.

  "Are you awake or asleep, One-Eye?
  Are you awake or asleep?"

sang Two-Eyes, until her sister really went to sleep. As soon as she was
quite sound, the maiden had her table out, and ate and drank all she
needed; and by the time One-Eye woke again the table had disappeared,
and the maiden said to her sister, "Come, we will go home now; while you
have been sleeping the goat might have run about all over the world." So
they went home, and after Two-Eyes had left her meal untouched, the
mother inquired of One-Eye what she had seen, and she was obliged to
confess that she had been asleep.

The following morning the mother told Three-Eyes that she must go out
and watch Two-Eyes, and see who brought her food, for it was certain
that some one must. So Three-Eyes told her sister that she was going to
accompany her that morning to see if she took care of the goat and fed
her well; but Two-Eyes saw through her design, and drove the goat again
to the best feeding-place. Then she asked her sister to sit down and she
would sing to her, and Three-Eyes did so, for she was very tired with
her long walk in the heat of the sun. Then Two-Eyes began to sing as
before:

  "Are you awake, Three-Eyes?"

but, instead of continuing as she should have done,

  "Are you asleep, Three-Eyes?"

she said by mistake,

  "Are you asleep, Two-Eyes?"

and so went on singing:

  "Are you awake, Three-Eyes?"
  "Are you asleep, Two-Eyes?"

By and by Three-Eyes closed two of her eyes, and went to sleep with
them; but the third eye, which was not spoken to, kept open. Three-Eyes,
however, cunningly shut it too, and feigned to be asleep, while she was
really watching; and soon Two-Eyes, thinking all safe, repeated the
words:

  "Little kid, milk
  Table, appear!"

and as soon as she was satisfied she said the old words:

  "Little kid, milk
  Table, depart!"

Three-Eyes watched all these proceedings; and presently Two-Eyes came
and awoke her, saying, "Ah, sister! you are a good watcher, but come,
let us go home now." When they reached home Two-Eyes again ate nothing;
and her sister told her mother she knew now why the haughty hussy would
not eat their victuals. "When she is out in the meadow," said her
sister, "she says:

  "'Little kid, milk
  Table, appear!'

"and, directly, a table comes up laid out with meat and wine, and
everything of the best, much better than we have; and as soon as she has
had enough she says:

  "'Little kid, milk
  Table, depart!'

"and all goes away directly, as I clearly saw. Certainly she did put to
sleep two of my eyes, but the one in the middle of my forehead luckily
kept awake!"

"Will you have better things than we?" cried the envious mother; "then
you shall lose the chance"; and so saying, she took a carving-knife and
killed the goat dead.

As soon as Two-Eyes saw this she went out, very sorrowful, to the old
spot and sat down where she had sat before to weep bitterly. All at once
the wise Woman stood in front of her again, and asked why she was
crying. "Must I not cry," replied she, "when the goat which used to
furnish me every day with a dinner, according to your promise, has been
killed by my mother, and I am again suffering hunger and thirst?"
"Two-Eyes," said the wise Woman, "I will give you a piece of advice. Beg
your sisters to give you the entrails of the goat, and bury them in the
earth before the house door, and your fortune will be made." So saying,
she disappeared, and Two-Eyes went home, and said to her sisters, "Dear
sisters, do give me some part of the slain kid; I desire nothing
else--let me have the entrails." The sisters laughed and readily gave
them to her; and she buried them secretly before the threshold of the
door, as the wise Woman had bidden her.

The following morning they found in front of the house a wonderfully
beautiful tree, with leaves of silver and fruits of gold hanging from
the boughs, than which nothing more splendid could be seen in the world.
The two elder sisters were quite ignorant how the tree came where it
stood; but Two-Eyes perceived that it was produced by the goat's
entrails, for it stood on the exact spot where she had buried them. As
soon as the mother saw it she told One-Eye to break off some of the
fruit. One-Eye went up to the tree, and pulled a bough toward her, to
pluck off the fruit; but the bough flew back again directly out of her
hands; and so it did every time she took hold of it, till she was forced
to give up, for she could not obtain a single golden apple in spite of
all her endeavors. Then the mother said to Three-Eyes, "Do you climb up,
for you can see better with your three eyes than your sister with her
one." Three-Eyes, however, was not more fortunate than her sister, for
the golden apples flew back as soon as she touched them. At last the
mother got so impatient that she climbed the tree herself; but she met
with no more success than either of her daughters, and grasped the air
only when she thought she had the fruit. Two-Eyes now thought she would
try, and said to her sisters, "Let me get up, perhaps I may be
successful." "Oh, you are very likely indeed," said they, "with your two
eyes: you will see well, no doubt!" So Two-Eyes climbed the tree, and
directly she touched the boughs the golden apples fell into her hands,
so that she plucked them as fast as she could, and filled her apron
before she went down. Her mother took them of her, but returned her no
thanks; and the two sisters, instead of treating Two-Eyes better than
they had done, were only the more envious of her, because she alone
could gather the fruit--in fact, they treated her worse.

One morning, not long after the springing up of the apple-tree, the
three sisters were all standing together beneath it, when in the
distance a young Knight was seen riding toward them. "Make haste,
Two-Eyes!" exclaimed the two elder sisters; "make haste, and creep out
of our way, that we may not be ashamed of you"; and so saying, they put
over her in great haste an empty cask which stood near, and which
covered the golden apples as well, which she had just been plucking.
Soon the Knight came up to the tree, and the sisters saw he was a very
handsome man, for he stopped to admire the fine silver leaves and golden
fruit, and presently asked to whom the tree belonged, for he should like
to have a branch off it. One-Eye and Three-Eyes replied that the tree
belonged to them; and they tried to pluck a branch off for the Knight.
They had their trouble for nothing, however, for the boughs and fruit
flew back as soon as they touched them. "This is very wonderful." cried
the Knight, "that this tree should belong to you, and yet you cannot
pluck the fruit!" The sisters, however, maintained that it was theirs;
but while they spoke Two-Eyes rolled a golden apple from underneath the
cask, so that it travelled to the feet of the Knight, for she was angry,
because her sisters had not spoken the truth. When he saw the apple he
was astonished, and asked where it came from; and One-Eye and Three-Eyes
said they had another sister, but they dared not let her be seen,
because she had only two eyes, like common folk! The Knight, however,
would see her, and called, "Two-Eyes, come here!" and soon she made her
appearance from under the cask. The Knight was bewildered at her great
beauty, and said, "You, Two-Eyes, can surely break off a bough of this
tree for me?" "Yes," she replied, "that I will, for it is my property";
and climbing up, she easily broke off a branch with silver leaves and
golden fruit, which she handed to the Knight. "What can I give you in
return, Two-Eyes?" asked the Knight. "Alas! if you will take me with you
I shall be happy, for now I suffer hunger and thirst, and am in trouble
and grief from early morning to late evening; take me, and save me!"
Thereupon the Knight raised Two-Eyes upon his saddle, and took her home
to his father's castle. There he gave her beautiful clothes, and all she
wished for to eat or to drink; and afterward, because his love for her
had become so great, he married her, and a very happy wedding they had.

Her two sisters, meanwhile, were very jealous when Two-Eyes was carried
off by the Knight; but they consoled themselves by saying, "The
wonderful tree remains still for us; and even if we cannot get at the
fruit, everybody that passes will stop to look at it, and then come and
praise it to us. Who knows where our wheat may bloom?" The morning after
this speech, however, the tree disappeared, and with it all their hopes;
but when Two-Eyes that same day looked out of her chamber window,
behold, the tree stood before it, and there remained!

For a long time after this occurrence Two-Eyes lived in the enjoyment of
the greatest happiness; and one morning two poor women came to the
palace and begged an alms. Two-Eyes, after looking narrowly at their
faces, recognized her two sisters, One-Eye and Three-Eyes, who had come
to such great poverty that they were forced to wander about, begging
their bread from day to day. Two-Eyes, however, bade them welcome,
invited them in, and took care of them, till they both repented of their
evil which they had done to their sister in the days of their childhood.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRIMM'S FAIRY STORIES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Four and Twenty Fairy Tales
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Four and Twenty Fairy Tales

Translator: J. R. Planché

Contributor: Charlotte Rose de Caumont de La Force
        comte de Anne Claude Philippe Caylus
        Jeanne-Marie Leprince de Beaumont
        Mlle de Lubert
        comtesse de Henriette-Julie de Castelnau Murat
        Charles Perrault

Engraver: Edward Dalziel
        George Dalziel

Illustrator: Edward Henry Corbould
        James Godwin
        William Harvey

Release date: August 4, 2016 [eBook #52719]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by David Edwards, Matthias Grammel and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOUR AND TWENTY FAIRY TALES ***

                         Fairy Tales.




                   [Illustration: PERRAULT]




                        FOUR AND TWENTY

                          FAIRY TALES.

                     SELECTED FROM THOSE OF

              PERRAULT, AND OTHER POPULAR WRITERS.


                           TRANSLATED

                        BY J. R. PLANCHÉ.


       WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY GODWIN, CORBOULD, AND HARVEY.


                             LONDON:
              G. ROUTLEDGE & CO., FARRINGDON STREET.
                   NEW YORK: 18, BEEKMAN STREET.
                              1858.

                [_This Translation is Copyright._]




                             LONDON:
          SAVILL AND EDWARDS, PRINTERS, CHANDOS STREET,
                          COVENT GARDEN.




                                TO

                            THE AUTHOR

                                OF

                   "A TRAP TO CATCH A SUNBEAM,"

                            THIS VOLUME

                           Is Inscribed,

                    BY HER AFFECTIONATE FATHER,

                           J. R. PLANCHÉ.




CONTENTS.


                                                        PAGE

  PREFACE                                                 ix

  BLUE BEARD                                               3

  THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD                          8

  MASTER CAT; OR, PUSS IN BOOTS                           17

  CINDERELLA; OR, THE LITTLE GLASS SLIPPER                22

  RIQUET WITH THE TUFT                                    28

  LITTLE THUMBLING                                        35

  PERFECT LOVE                                            47

  ANGUILLETTE                                             75

  YOUNG AND HANDSOME                                     108

  THE PALACE OF REVENGE                                  131

  THE PRINCE OF LEAVES                                   145

  THE FORTUNATE PUNISHMENT                               163

  FAIRER THAN A FAIRY                                    183

  THE GOOD WOMAN                                         203

  THE STORY OF BEAUTY AND THE BEAST                      225

  PRINCESS MINUTE AND KING FLORIDOR                      329

  THE IMPOSSIBLE ENCHANTMENT                             336

  BLEUETTE AND COQUELICOT                                358

  PRINCESS CAMION                                        375

  PRINCESS LIONETTE AND PRINCE COQUERICO                 416

  PRINCE DÉSIR                                           477

  PRINCE CHÉRI                                           483

  THE WIDOW AND HER TWO DAUGHTERS                        494

  PRINCE FATAL AND PRINCE FORTUNÉ                        498

  APPENDIX                                               509




PREFACE.


The success attending the publication of a new translation of the
Fairy Tales of the Countess d'Aulnoy has justified the publishers in
believing that an equally faithful version of some of the most popular
stories of her contemporaries and immediate successors, similarly
annotated, might meet with as favourable a reception. I have therefore
selected twenty-four of the best Fairy Tales, according to my judgment,
remaining in the _Cabinet des Fées_, commencing with those of Charles
Perrault, the earliest, and terminating with some of Madame Leprince
de Beaumont, the latest French writer of European celebrity in that
particular class of literature. Independently of the fact that, with
the exception of those of Madame de Beaumont, few if any in the present
volume have ever been placed in their integrity before the English
reader, I trust that the chronological order I have observed in their
arrangement will give them a novel interest in the eyes of those
"children of a larger growth," who are not ashamed to confess, with La
Fontaine--

    Si "_Peau d'ane_" m'étoit conté
    J'y prendrais un plaisir extrême.

Or with the great Reformer, Martin Luther--

 "I would not for any quantity of gold part with the wonderful tales
 which I have retained from my earliest childhood or have met with in
 my progress through life."

The reader will by this arrangement observe, in a clearer way than
probably he has yet had an opportunity of doing, the rise, progress,
and decline of the genuine Fairy Tale--so thoroughly French in its
origin, so specially connected with the age of that "Grand Monarque"
whose reign presents us, in the graphic pages of St. Simon and
Dangeau, with innumerable pictures of manners and customs, dresses and
entertainments, the singularity, magnificence, profusion, and extent
of which scarcely require the fancy of a d'Aulnoy to render fabulous.
In my introduction to the tales of that "lively and ingenious lady,"
I have already shown the progress of the popularity of this class
of composition; but in the present volume it will be seen how, in
the course of little more than half a century, the Fairy Tale, from
a fresh, sparkling, simple yet arch version of a legend as old as
the monuments of that Celtic race by whom they were introduced into
Gaul, became first elaborated into a novel, comprising an ingenious
plot, with an amusing exaggeration of the manners of the period;
next, inflated into a preposterous and purposeless caricature of its
own peculiarities; and finally, denuded of its sportive fancy, its
latent humour, and its gorgeous extravagance, subsided into the dull
common-place moral story, which, taking less hold of the youthful
imagination, was, however laudable in its intention, a very ineffective
substitute for the merry monitors it vainly endeavoured to supersede.
Too much like a lesson for the child, it was too childish for the man.
The Fairies were dismissed in consequence of the incapacity of the
writers to employ them; but they were not to be annihilated. They still
live in their own land, to laugh at those mortals who will not laugh
with them and learn while they laugh. Modern art may vainly invoke
them to perform fresh marvels, but enough power still exists in their
old spells to enchant youth, amuse manhood, and resuscitate age; and,
despite the hypercritic and the purist, they will continue to exercise
their magic influence over the human mind so long as it is capable of
appreciating wit, fancy, and good feeling. As Mademoiselle Lheritier
wrote two hundred years ago--

    Ils ne sont pas aisées à croire,
    Mais tant que dans le monde on verra des enfans,
    Des mères et des mères-grands
    On en gardera la memoire.




                         CHARLES PERRAULT.




BLUE BEARD.


Once on a time there was a man who had fine town and country houses,
gold and silver plate, embroidered furniture, and coaches gilt all
over; but unfortunately, this man had a blue beard, which made him
look so ugly and terrible, that there was not a woman or girl who did
not run away from him. One of his neighbours, a lady of quality, had
two daughters, who were perfectly beautiful. He proposed to marry one
of them, leaving her to choose which of the two she would give him.
Neither of them would have him; and they sent him from one to the
other, not being able to make up their minds to marry a man who had a
blue beard. What increased their distaste to him was, that he had had
several wives already, and nobody knew what had become of them.

Blue Beard, in order to cultivate their acquaintance, took them, with
their mother, three or four of their most intimate friends, and some
young persons who resided in the neighbourhood, to one of his country
seats, where they passed an entire week. Nothing was thought of but
excursions, hunting and fishing, parties, balls, entertainments,
collations; nobody went to bed; the whole night was spent in merry
games and gambols. In short, all went off so well, that the youngest
daughter began to find out that the beard of the master of the house
was not as blue as it used to be, and that he was a very worthy man.
Immediately upon their return to town the marriage took place. At the
end of a month Blue Beard told his wife that he was obliged to take a
journey, which would occupy six weeks at least, on a matter of great
consequence; that he entreated she would amuse herself as much as she
could during his absence; that she would invite her best friends, take
them into the country with her if she pleased, and keep an excellent
table everywhere.

"Here," said he to her, "are the keys of my two great store-rooms;
these are those of the chests in which the gold and silver plate is
kept, that is only used on particular occasions; these are the keys of
the strong boxes in which I keep my money; these open the caskets that
contain my jewels; and this is the pass-key of all the apartments. As
for this little key, it is that of the closet at the end of the long
gallery, on the ground floor. Open everything, and go everywhere except
into that little closet, which I forbid you to enter, and I forbid you
so strictly, that if you should venture to open the door, there is
nothing that you may not have to dread from my anger!" She promised to
observe implicitly all his directions, and after he had embraced her,
he got into his coach and set out on his journey.

The neighbours and friends of the young bride did not wait for her
invitation, so eager were they to see all the treasures contained in
the mansion, not having ventured to enter it while the husband was at
home, so terrified were they at his blue beard. Behold them immediately
running through all the rooms, closets, and wardrobes, each apartment
exceeding the other in beauty and richness. They ascended afterwards to
the store-rooms, where they could not sufficiently admire the number
and elegance of the tapestries, the beds, the sofas, the cabinets,
the stands,[1] the tables, and the mirrors in which they could see
themselves from head to foot, and that had frames some of glass,[2]
some of silver, and some of gilt metal, more beautiful and magnificent
than had ever been seen. They never ceased enlarging upon and envying
the good fortune of their friend, who in the meanwhile was not in the
least entertained by the sight of all these treasures, in consequence
of her impatience to open the closet on the ground floor.

Her curiosity increased to such a degree that, without reflecting how
rude it was to leave her company, she ran down a back staircase in such
haste that twice or thrice she narrowly escaped breaking her neck.
Arrived at the door of the closet, she paused for a moment, bethinking
herself of her husband's prohibition, and that some misfortune might
befall her for her disobedience; but the temptation was so strong
that she could not conquer it. She therefore took the little key and
opened, tremblingly, the door of the closet. At first she could discern
nothing, the windows being closed; after a short time she began to
perceive that the floor was all covered with clotted blood, in which
were reflected the dead bodies of several females suspended against
the walls. These were all the wives of Blue Beard, who had cut their
throats one after the other. She was ready to die with fright, and the
key of the closet, which she had withdrawn from the lock, fell from
her hand. After recovering her senses a little, she picked up the key,
locked the door again, and went up to her chamber to compose herself;
but she could not succeed, so greatly was she agitated. Having observed
that the key of the closet was stained with blood, she wiped it two
or three times, but the blood would not come off. In vain she washed
it, and even scrubbed it with sand and free-stone, the blood was still
there, for the key was enchanted, and there were no means of cleaning
it completely: when the blood was washed off one side, it came back on
the other.

Blue Beard returned that very evening, and said that he had received
letters on the road informing him that the business on which he was
going had been settled to his advantage. His wife did all she could
to persuade him that she was delighted at his speedy return. The next
morning he asked her for his keys again; she gave them to him; but her
hand trembled so, that he had not much difficulty in guessing what had
occurred. "How comes it," said he, "that the key of the closet is not
with the others?" "I must have left it," she replied, "upstairs on my
table." "Fail not," said Blue Beard, "to give it me presently." After
several excuses, she was compelled to produce the key. Blue Beard
having examined it, said to his wife, "Why is there some blood on
this key?" "I don't know," answered the poor wife, paler than death.
"You don't know?" rejoined Blue Beard. "I know well enough. You must
needs enter the closet. Well, madam, you shall enter it, and go take
your place amongst the ladies you saw there." She flung herself at her
husband's feet, weeping and begging his pardon, with all the signs of
true repentance for having disobeyed him. Her beauty and affliction
might have melted a rock, but Blue Beard had a heart harder than a
rock. "You must die, madam," said he, "and immediately." "If I must
die," she replied, looking at him with streaming eyes, "give me a
little time to say my prayers." "I give you half a quarter of an hour,"
answered Blue Beard, "but not a minute more." As soon as he had left
her, she called her sister, and said to her, "Sister Anne" (for so she
was named), "go up, I pray thee, to the top of the tower, and see if my
brothers are not coming. They have promised me that they would come to
see me to-day; and if you see them, sign to them to make haste." Sister
Anne mounted to the top of the tower, and the poor distressed creature
called to her every now and then, "Anne! sister Anne! dost thou not see
anything coming?" And sister Anne answered her, "I see nothing but the
sun making dust, and the grass growing green."

In the meanwhile Blue Beard, with a great cutlass in his hand, called
out with all his might to his wife, "Come down quickly, or I will come
up there." "One minute more, if you please," replied his wife; and
immediately repeated in a low voice, "Anne! sister Anne! dost thou not
see anything coming?" And sister Anne replied, "I see nothing but the
sun making dust, and the grass growing green." "Come down quickly,"
roared Blue Beard, "or I will come up there." "I come," answered
his wife, and then exclaimed, "Anne! sister Anne! dost thou not see
anything coming?" "I see," said sister Anne, "a great cloud of dust
moving this way." "Is it my brothers?" "Alas! no, sister, I see a flock
of sheep." "Wilt thou not come down?" shouted Blue Beard. "One minute
more," replied his wife, and then she cried, "Anne! sister Anne! dost
thou not see anything coming?" "I see," she replied, "two horsemen
coming this way; but they are still at a great distance." "Heaven be
praised!" she exclaimed, a moment afterwards. "They are my brothers! I
am making all the signs I can to hasten them." Blue Beard began to roar
so loudly that the whole house shook again. The poor wife descended,
and went and threw herself, with streaming eyes and dishevelled
tresses, at his feet.

"It is of no use," said Blue Beard. "You must die!" Then seizing her by
the hair with one hand, and raising his cutlass with the other, he was
about to cut off her head. The poor wife turned towards him, and fixing
upon him her dying eyes, implored him to allow her one short moment
to collect herself. "No, no," said he; "recommend thyself heartily to
Heaven." And lifting his arm---- At this moment there was so loud a
knocking at the gate, that Blue Beard stopped short. It was opened,
and two horsemen were immediately seen to enter, who, drawing their
swords, ran straight at Blue Beard. He recognised them as the brothers
of his wife--one a dragoon, the other a musqueteer, and, consequently,
fled immediately, in hope to escape; but they pursued him so closely,
that they overtook him before he could reach the step of his door,
and, passing their swords through his body, left him dead on the spot.
The poor wife was almost as dead as her husband, and had not strength
to rise and embrace her brothers. It was found that Blue Beard had no
heirs, and so his widow remained possessed of all his property. She
employed part of it in marrying her sister Anne to a young gentleman
who had long loved her; another part, in buying captains' commissions
for her two brothers, and with the rest she married herself to a very
worthy man, who made her forget the miserable time she had passed with
Blue Beard.

    Provided one has common sense,
    And of the world but knows the ways,
    This story bears the evidence
    Of being one of bygone days.
    No husband now is so terrific,
    Impossibilities, expecting:
    Though jealous, he is still pacific,
    Indifference to his wife affecting.
    And of his beard, whate'er the hue,
    His spouse need fear no such disaster.
    Indeed, 'twould often puzzle you
    To say which of the twain is master.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Gueridons, _i.e._, stands to place lights or china upon.
The word is now used to signify any small round table with one foot;
but the old-fashioned stand, which was higher than a table, and its top
not bigger than a dessert plate, is occasionally to be met with.

[2] Looking-glasses with frames of the same material were much
in vogue at that period. Of silver-framed mirrors some magnificent
specimens remain to us at Knowle Park, Kent.




THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD.


Once upon a time there was a King and a Queen, who were so vexed at
not having any children--so vexed, that one cannot express it. They
visited all the baths in the world. Vows, pilgrimages, everything was
tried, and nothing succeeded. At length, however, the Queen was brought
to bed of a daughter. There was a splendid christening. For godmothers
they gave the young Princess all the Fairies they could find in the
country (they found seven), in order that each making her a gift,
according to the custom of Fairies in those days, the Princess would,
by these means, become possessed of all imaginable perfections. After
the baptismal ceremonies all the company returned to the King's palace,
where a great banquet was set out for the Fairies. Covers were laid
for each, consisting of a magnificent plate, with a massive gold case,
containing a spoon, a fork, and a knife of fine gold, enriched with
diamonds and rubies. But as they were all taking their places at the
table, there was seen to enter an old Fairy, who had not been invited,
because for upwards of fifty years she had never quitted the tower she
resided in, and it was supposed she was either dead or enchanted.

The King ordered a cover to be laid for her; but there was no
possibility of giving her a massive gold case such as the others had,
because there had been only seven made expressly for the seven Fairies.
The old lady thought she was treated with contempt, and muttered some
threats between her teeth. One of the young Fairies, who chanced to be
near her, overheard her, and imagining she might cast some misfortune
on the little Princess, went, as soon as they rose from table, and hid
herself behind the hangings, in order to have the last word, and be
able to repair, as fast as possible, any mischief the old woman might
do. In the meanwhile, the Fairies began to endow the Princess. The
youngest, as her gift, decreed that she should be the most beautiful
person in the world; the next Fairy, that she should have the mind of
an angel; the third, that she should evince the most admirable grace
in all she did; the fourth, that she should dance to perfection; the
fifth, that she should sing like a nightingale; and the sixth, that she
should play on every instrument in the most exquisite manner possible.
The turn of the old Fairy having arrived, she declared, while her head
shook more with malice than with age, that the Princess should pierce
her hand with a spindle, and die of the wound. This terrible fate
made all the company tremble, and there was not one of them who could
refrain from tears. At this moment the young Fairy issued from behind
the tapestry, and uttered aloud these words: "Comfort yourselves, King
and Queen--your daughter shall not die of it. It is true that I have
not sufficient power to undo entirely what my elder has done. The
Princess will pierce her hand with a spindle; but, instead of dying,
she will only fall into a deep slumber, which will last one hundred
years, at the end of which a King's son will come to wake her."

The King, in hope of avoiding the misfortune predicted by the old
Fairy, immediately caused an edict to be published, by which he
forbade any one to spin with a spindle, or to have spindles in their
possession, under pain of death.

At the end of fifteen or sixteen years, the King and Queen, being
absent at one of their country residences, it happened that the
Princess, while running one day about the castle, and from one chamber
up to another, arrived at the top of a tower, and entered a little
garret, where an honest old woman was sitting by herself, spinning
with her distaff and spindle. This good woman had never heard of the
King's prohibition with respect to spinning with a spindle. "What are
you doing there?" asked the Princess. "I am spinning, my fair child,"
answered the old woman, who did not know her. "Oh, how pretty it is!"
rejoined the Princess. "How do you do it? Give it to me, that I may see
if I can do it as well." She had no sooner taken hold of the spindle,
than, being very hasty, a little thoughtless, and, moreover, the
sentence of the Fairies so ordaining it, she pierced her hand with the
point of it, and fainted away. The good old woman, greatly embarrassed,
called for help. People came from all quarters; they threw water in
the Princess's face; they unlaced her stays; they slapped her hands;
they rubbed her temples with Queen of Hungary's water,[3] but nothing
could bring her to. The King, who had run upstairs at the noise, then
remembered the prediction of the Fairies, and, wisely concluding that
this must have occurred as the Fairies said it would, had the Princess
conveyed into the finest apartment in the palace, and placed on a bed
of gold and silver embroidery. One would have said she was an angel, so
lovely did she appear--for her swoon had not deprived her of her rich
complexion: her cheeks preserved their crimson, and her lips were like
coral. Her eyes were closed, but they could hear her breathe softly,
which showed that she was not dead. The King commanded them to let her
repose in peace until the hour arrived for her waking. The good Fairy
who had saved her life, by decreeing that she should sleep for an
hundred years, was in the Kingdom of Mataquin, twelve thousand leagues
off, when the Princess met with her accident; but she was informed of
it instantly by a little dwarf, who had a pair of seven-league boots
(that is, boots which enabled the wearer to take seven leagues at a
stride[4]). The Fairy set out immediately and an hour afterwards they
saw her arrive in a fiery chariot, drawn by dragons. The King advanced,
to hand her out of the chariot. She approved of all he had done; but,
as she had great foresight, she considered that, when the Princess
awoke, she would feel considerably embarrassed at finding herself all
alone in that old castle; so this is what the Fairy did. She touched
with her wand everybody that was in the castle (except the King and
Queen): governesses, maids of honour, women of the bed-chamber,
gentlemen, officers, stewards, cooks, scullions, boys, guards, porters,
pages, footmen; she touched also the horses that were in the stables,
with their grooms, the great mastiffs in the court-yard, and little
Pouste, the tiny dog of the Princess, that was on the bed, beside her.
As soon as she had touched them, they all fell asleep, not to wake
again until the time arrived for their mistress to do so, in order
that they might be all ready to attend upon her when she should want
them. Even the spits that had been put down to the fire, laden with
partridges and pheasants, went to sleep, and the fire itself also.

All this was done in a moment; the fairies never lost much time over
their work. After which, the King and Queen, having kissed their
dear daughter without waking her, quitted the Castle, and issued a
proclamation forbidding any person, whosoever, to approach it. These
orders were unnecessary, for in a quarter of an hour there grew up
around the Park so great a quantity of trees, large and small, of
brambles and thorns, interlacing each other, that neither man nor beast
could get through them, so that nothing more was to be seen than the
tops of the Castle turrets, and they only at a considerable distance.
Nobody doubted but that was also some of the Fairy's handiwork, in
order that the Princess might have nothing to fear from the curiosity
of strangers during her slumber.

At the expiration of an hundred years, the son of the King at that
time upon the throne, and who was of a different family to that of the
sleeping Princess, having been hunting in that neighbourhood, inquired
what towers they were that he saw above the trees of a very thick wood.
Each person answered him according to the story he had heard. Some
said that it was an old castle, haunted by ghosts. Others, that all
the witches of those parts held their Sabbath in it. The more general
opinion was, that it was the abode of an ogre; and that he carried
thither all the children he could catch, in order to eat them at his
leisure, and without being pursued, having alone the power of making
his way through the wood. The Prince did not know what to believe about
it, when an old peasant spoke in his turn, and said to him, "Prince,
it is more than fifty years ago since I heard my father say that there
was in that Castle the most beautiful Princess that was ever seen.
That she was to sleep for a hundred years, and would be awakened by
a King's son for whom she was reserved." The young Prince, at these
words, felt himself all on fire. He believed, without hesitation, that
he was destined to accomplish this famous adventure; and, impelled by
love and glory, resolved to see what would come of it, upon the spot.
Scarcely had he approached the wood, when all those great trees, all
those brambles and thorns made way for him to pass of their own accord.
He walked towards the Castle, which he saw at the end of a long avenue
he had entered, and what rather surprised him was, that he found none
of his people had been able to follow him, the trees having closed
up again as soon as he had passed. He continued, nevertheless, to
advance; a young and amorous prince is always courageous. He entered
a large fore-court, where everything he saw was calculated to freeze
his blood with terror. A frightful silence reigned around. Death
seemed everywhere present. Nothing was to be seen but the bodies of
men and animals stretched out apparently lifeless. He soon discovered,
however, by the shining noses and red faces of the porters, that they
were only asleep; and their goblets, in which still remained a few
drops of wine, sufficiently proved that they had dosed off whilst
drinking. He passed through a large court-yard paved with marble; he
ascended the staircase. He entered the guard-room, where the guards
stood drawn up in line, their carbines shouldered, and snoring their
loudest. He traversed several apartments, with ladies and gentlemen
all asleep; some standing, others seated. He entered a chamber covered
with gold, and saw on a bed, the curtains of which were open on each
side, the most lovely sight he had ever looked upon--a Princess, who
seemed to be about fifteen or sixteen, the lustre of whose charms gave
her an appearance that was luminous and supernatural. He approached,
trembling and admiring, and knelt down beside her. At that moment, the
enchantment being ended, the Princess awoke, and gazing upon the Prince
with more tenderness than a first sight of him seemed to authorize, "Is
it you, Prince?" said she; "you have been long awaited." The Prince,
delighted at these words, and still more by the tone in which they were
uttered, knew not how to express to her his joy and gratitude.

  [Illustration: The Sleeping Beauty.--P. 12.]

He assured her he loved her better than himself. His language was not
very coherent, but it pleased the more. There was little eloquence,
but a great deal of love. He was much more embarrassed than she was,
and one ought not to be astonished at that. The Princess had had time
enough to consider what she should say to him, for there is reason to
believe (though history makes no mention of it) that, during her long
nap, the good Fairy had procured her the pleasure of very agreeable
dreams. In short, they talked for four hours without having said half
what they had to say to each other.

In the meanwhile, all the Palace had been roused at the same time
as the Princess. Everybody remembered their duty, and, as they were
not all in love, they were dying with hunger. The lady-in-waiting,
as hungry as any of them, became impatient, and announced loudly to
the Princess that the meat was on the table. The Prince assisted the
Princess to rise; she was full dressed, and most magnificently, but
he took good care not to hint to her that she was attired like his
grandmother, and wore a stand-up collar.[5] She looked, however, not
a morsel the less lovely in it. They passed into a hall of mirrors,
in which they supped, attended by the officers of the Princess.
The violins and hautbois played old but excellent pieces of music,
notwithstanding it was a hundred years since they had been performed by
anybody; and after supper, to lose no time, the grand Almoner married
the royal lovers in the chapel of the Castle.

Early next morning the Prince returned to the city, where his father
was in great anxiety about him. The Prince told him that he had lost
himself in the forest whilst hunting, and that he had slept in a
woodcutter's hut, who had given him some black bread and cheese for
his supper. The King, his father, who was a simple man, believed him,
but his mother was not so easily satisfied; and observing that he went
hunting nearly every day, and had always some story ready as an excuse,
when he had slept two or three nights away from home, she no longer
doubted but that he had some mistress, for he lived with the Princess
for upwards of two years, and had two children by her; the first, which
was a girl, was named Aurora, and the second, a son, was called Day,
because he was still more beautiful than his sister.

The Queen often said to her son, in order to draw from him some
avowal, that he ought to form some attachment; but he never ventured
to trust her with his secret. He feared her, although he loved her,
for she was of the race of Ogres, and the King had married her only
on account of her great wealth. It was even whispered about the Court
that she had the inclinations of an Ogress, and that when she saw
little children passing, she had the greatest difficulty in restraining
herself from pouncing upon them. The Prince, therefore, would never say
one word about his adventure. On the death of the King, however, which
happened two years afterwards, the Prince being his own master, he
made a public declaration of his marriage, and went in great state to
bring the Queen, his wife, to the palace. She made a magnificent entry
into the capital with her two children, one on each side of her. Some
time afterwards, the King went to war with his neighbour, the Emperor
Cantalabute. He left the regency of the kingdom to the Queen, his
mother, earnestly recommending to her care his wife and his children.
He was likely to be all the summer in the field, and as soon as he was
gone, the Queen-mother sent her daughter-in-law and the children to
a country house in the wood, that she might more easily gratify her
horrible longing. She followed them thither a few days after, and said
one evening to her Maître d'Hôtel, "I will eat little Aurora for dinner
to-morrow." "Ah, Madam!" exclaimed the Maître d'Hôtel. "I will," said
the Queen (and she said it in the tone of an Ogress longing to eat
fresh meat), "and I will have her served up with _sauce Robert_."[6]
The poor man seeing plainly an Ogress was not to be trifled with, took
his great knife and went up to little Aurora's room. She was then about
four years old, and came jumping and laughing to throw her arms about
his neck, and ask him for sweetmeats. He burst into tears, the knife
fell from his hands, and he went down again into the kitchen court and
killed a little lamb, and served it up with so delicious a sauce, that
his mistress assured him she had never eaten anything so excellent. In
the meanwhile, he had carried off little Aurora, and given her to his
wife, to conceal her in the lodging which she occupied at the further
end of the kitchen court.

A week afterwards, the wicked Queen said to her Maître d'Hôtel, "I
will eat little Day for supper." He made no reply, being determined to
deceive her as before. He went in search of little Day, and found him
with a tiny foil in his hand, fencing with a great monkey, though he
was only three years old. He carried him to his wife, who hid him where
she had hidden his sister, and then cooked a very tender little kid in
the place of little Day, and which the Ogress thought wonderfully good.
All went well enough so far, but one evening this wicked Queen said to
the Maître d'Hôtel, "I would eat the Queen with the same sauce that
I had with her children." Then, indeed, did the poor Maître d'Hôtel
despair of being again able to deceive her. The young Queen was turned
of twenty, without counting the hundred years she had slept; her skin
was a little tough, though it was white and beautiful, and where was he
to find in the menagerie an animal that would pass for her.

He resolved that, to save his own life, he would cut the Queen's
throat, and went up to her apartment with the determination to execute
his purpose at once. He worked himself up into a passion, and entered
the young Queen's chamber poniard in hand. He would not, however, take
her by surprise, but repeated, very respectfully, the order he had
received from the Queen-mother. "Do it! do it!" said she, stretching
out her neck to him. "Obey the order that has been given to you. I
shall again behold my children, my poor children, that I loved so
dearly." She had imagined them to be dead ever since they had been
carried off without explanation. "No, no, Madam!" replied the poor
Maître d'Hôtel, touched to the quick, "you shall not die, and you shall
see your children again, but it shall be in my own house, where I have
hidden them; and I will again deceive the Queen-mother by serving up
to her a young hind in your stead." He led her forthwith to his own
apartments, where leaving her to embrace her children and weep with
them, he went and cooked a hind, of which the Queen ate at her supper,
with as much appetite as if it had been the young Queen. She exulted
in her cruelty, and intended to tell the King, on his return, that some
ferocious wolves had devoured the Queen his wife, and her two children.

One evening that she was prowling, as usual, round the courts and
poultry yards of the Castle, to inhale the smell of raw flesh, she
overheard little Day crying in a lower room, because the Queen, his
mother, was about to whip him for having been naughty, and she also
heard little Aurora begging forgiveness for her brother. The Ogress
recognised the voices of the Queen and her children, and, furious at
having been cheated, she gave orders, in a tone that made everybody
tremble, that the next morning early there should be brought into the
middle of the court a large copper, which she had filled with toads,
vipers, adders, and serpents, in order to fling into it the Queen, her
children, the Maître d'Hôtel, his wife, and his maid servant. She had
commanded that they should be brought thither with hands tied behind
them. There they stood, and the executioners were preparing to fling
them into the copper, when the King, who was not expected so early,
entered the court-yard on horseback. He had ridden post, and in great
astonishment inquired what was the meaning of that horrible spectacle?
Nobody dared to tell him, when the Ogress, enraged at the sight of the
King's return, flung herself head foremost into the copper, and was
devoured in an instant by the horrid reptiles she had caused it to
be filled with. The King could not help being sorry for it; she was
his mother, but he speedily consoled himself in the society of his
beautiful wife and children.

    Some time for a husband to wait
    Who is young, handsome, wealthy, and tender,
    May not be a hardship too great
    For a maid whom love happy would render.
    But to be for a century bound
    To live single, I fancy the number
    Of Beauties but small would be found
    So long who could patiently slumber.
    To lovers who hate time to waste,
    And minutes as centuries measure,
    I would hint, Those who marry in haste
    May live to repent it at leisure.
    Yet so ardently onwards they press,
    And on prudence so gallantly trample,
    That I haven't the heart, I confess,
    To urge on them Beauty's example.


FOOTNOTES:

[3] A celebrated distillation of spirit of wine upon rosemary,
so-called from the receipt, purporting to have been written by a Queen
Elizabeth of Hungary, and first published at Frankfort in 1659.

[4] From the explanation contained in this parenthesis, it is
probable that we have here the earliest mention of these celebrated
articles in a French story; _Jack the Giant-killer_ and _Jack and the
Bean-stalk_ being of English origin.

[5] _Collet-monté._ The contemporary of the ruff. In the reign
of Louis the Fourteenth it was succeeded by the _collet-rabattu_, and
totally discarded before his decease.

[6] A sauce piquante, as ancient as the fifteenth century,
being one of the seventeen sauces named by Taillevant, chief cook to
Charles VII. of France, in 1456.




MASTER CAT;

OR,

PUSS IN BOOTS.


A Miller bequeathed to his three sons all his worldly goods, which
consisted only of his mill, his ass, and his cat. The division was
speedily made. Neither notary nor attorney were called in; they would
soon have eaten up all the little patrimony. The eldest had the mill;
the second son, the ass; and the youngest had nothing but the cat. The
latter was disconsolate at inheriting so poor a portion. "My brothers,"
said he, "may earn an honest livelihood by entering into partnership;
but, as for me, when I have eaten my Cat, and made a muff of his skin,
I must die of hunger." The Cat, who had heard this speech, but without
appearing to do so, said to him, with a sedate and serious air, "Do
not afflict yourself, master; you have only to give me a bag and get a
pair of boots made for me, to go amongst the bushes in, and you will
see that you are not so badly left as you believe." Though the Cat's
master did not place much confidence in this assertion, he had seen him
play such cunning tricks in catching rats and mice, when he would hang
himself up by the heels, or lie in the flour as if he were dead, that
he was not altogether hopeless of being assisted by him in his distress.

As soon as the Cat had what he asked for, he pulled on his boots
boldly, and hanging the bag round his neck, he took the strings of
it in his fore paws, and went into a warren where there were a great
number of rabbits. He put some bran and some sow-thistles in his bag,
and stretching himself out as if he were dead, he waited till some
young rabbit, little versed in the wiles of the world, should come and
ensconce himself in the bag, in order to eat what he had put into it.
He had hardly laid down before he was gratified. A young scatterbrain
of a rabbit entered the bag, and Master Cat instantly pulling the
strings, caught it and killed it without mercy. Proud of his prey, he
went to the King's Palace, and demanded an audience. He was ushered
up to his Majesty's apartment, into which having entered, he made a
low bow to the King, and said to him, "Sire, here is a wild rabbit,
which my Lord the Marquis de Carabas (such was the name he took a fancy
to give to his master) has ordered me to present, with his duty, to
your Majesty." "Tell your master," replied the King, "that I thank
him, and that he has given me great pleasure." Another day he went
and hid himself in the wheat, holding the mouth of his bag open, as
usual, and as soon as a brace of partridges entered it, he pulled the
strings, and took them both. He went immediately and presented them
to the King, in the same way that he had the wild rabbit. The King
received with equal gratification the brace of partridges, and gave
him something to drink his health. The Cat continued in this manner
during two or three months to carry to the King, every now and then,
presents of game from his master. One day when he knew the King was
going to drive on the banks of the river, with his daughter, the most
beautiful Princess in the world, he said to his master, "If you will
follow my advice, your fortune is made; you have only to go and bathe
in a part of the river I will point out to you, and leave the rest to
me." The Marquis de Carabas did as his cat advised him, without knowing
what good would come of it. While he was bathing, the King passed by,
and the Cat began to shout with all his might, "Help! help! My Lord
the Marquis de Carabas is drowning!" At this cry, the King looked out
of the coach window, and recognising the cat who had so often brought
game to him, ordered his guards to fly to the help of my Lord the
Marquis de Carabas. Whilst they were getting the poor Marquis out of
the river, the Cat approaching the royal coach, told the King that
during the time his master was bathing, some robbers had come and
carried off his clothes, although he had called "Thieves!" as loud
as he could. The rogue had hidden them himself under a great stone.
The King immediately ordered the officers of his wardrobe to go and
fetch one of his handsomest suits for my Lord the Marquis de Carabas.
The King embraced him a thousand times, and as the fine clothes they
dressed him in set off his good looks (for he was handsome and well
made), the King's daughter found him much to her taste; and the Marquis
de Carabas had no sooner cast upon her two or three respectful and
rather tender glances, than she fell desperately in love with him.
The King insisted upon his getting into the coach, and accompanying
them in their drive. The Cat, enchanted to see that his scheme began
to succeed, ran on before, and having met with some peasants who were
mowing a meadow, said to them, "You, good people, who are mowing here,
if you do not tell the King that the meadow you are mowing belongs to
my Lord the Marquis de Carabas, you shall be all cut into pieces as
small as minced meat!" The King failed not to ask the mowers whose
meadow it was they were mowing? "It belongs to my Lord the Marquis de
Carabas," said they altogether, for the Cat's threat had frightened
them. "You perceive, Sire," rejoined the Marquis, "it is a meadow which
yields an abundant crop every year." Master Cat, who kept in advance
of the party, came up to some reapers, and said to them, "You, good
people, who are reaping, if you do not say that all this corn belongs
to my Lord the Marquis de Carabas, you shall be all cut into pieces as
small as minced meat!" The King, who passed by a minute afterwards,
wished to know to whom all those cornfields belonged that he saw there.
"To my Lord the Marquis de Carabas," repeated the reapers, and the King
again wished the Marquis joy of his property. The Cat, who ran before
the coach, uttered the same threat to all he met with, and the King
was astonished at the great wealth of my Lord the Marquis de Carabas.
Master Cat at length arrived at a fine Château, the owner of which was
an Ogre, the richest that was ever known, for all the lands through
which the King had driven were held of the Lord of this Château. The
Cat took care to inquire who the Ogre was, and what he was able to do;
and then requested to speak with him, saying that he would not pass
so near his Château without doing himself the honour of paying his
respects to him. The Ogre received him as civilly as an Ogre could, and
made him sit down. "They assure me," said the Cat, "that you possess
the power of changing yourself into all sorts of animals; that you
could, for instance, transform yourself into a lion, or an elephant."
"'Tis true," said the Ogre, brusquely, "and to prove it to you, you
shall see me become a lion." The Cat was so frightened at seeing a
lion before him, that he immediately scampered up into the gutter, not
without trouble and danger, on account of his boots, which were not
fit to walk on the tiles with. A short time afterwards, the Cat having
perceived that the Ogre had resumed his previous form, descended,
and admitted that he had been terribly frightened. "They assure me,
besides," said the Cat, "but I cannot believe it, that you have also
the power to assume the form of the smallest animal; for instance, to
change yourself into a rat or a mouse. I confess to you I hold that
to be utterly impossible." "Impossible!" replied the Ogre; "you shall
see!" and immediately changed himself into a mouse, which began to run
about the floor. The Cat no sooner caught sight of it than he pounced
upon and devoured it. In the meanwhile, the King, who saw from the
road the fine Château of the Ogre, desired to enter it. The Cat, who
heard the noise of the coach rolling over the drawbridge, ran to meet
it, and said to the King, "Your Majesty is welcome to the Château of
my Lord the Marquis de Carabas." "How, my Lord Marquis," exclaimed the
King, "this Château also belongs to you? Nothing can be finer than
this court-yard, and all these buildings that surround it. Let us see
the inside of it, if you please." The Marquis handed out the young
Princess, and following the King, who led the way upstairs, entered a
grand hall, where they found a magnificent collation, which the Ogre
had ordered to be prepared for some friends who were to have visited
him that very day, but who did not presume to enter when they found the
King was there. The King, as much enchanted by the accomplishments of
my Lord the Marquis de Carabas as his daughter, who doted upon him, and
seeing the great wealth he possessed, said to him, after having drunk
five or six bumpers, "It depends entirely on yourself, my Lord Marquis,
whether or not you become my son-in-law." The Marquis, making several
profound bows, accepted the honour the King offered him; and on the
same day was united to the Princess. The Cat became a great lord, and
never again ran after mice, except for his amusement.

          Be the advantage ne'er so great
          Of owning a superb estate,
          From sire to son descended.
          Young men oft find, on industry,
          Combined with ingenuity,
          They'd better have depended.

ALSO

    If the son of a Miller so quickly could gain
    The heart of a Princess, it seems pretty plain,
    With good looks and good manners, and some aid from dress,
    The humblest need not quite despair of success.




CINDERELLA;

OR,

THE LITTLE GLASS SLIPPER.


Once on a time there was a gentleman who took for a second wife the
haughtiest and proudest woman that had ever been seen. She had two
daughters of the same temper, and who resembled her in everything. The
husband, on his side, had a daughter, but whose gentleness and goodness
were without parallel. She inherited them from her mother, who was the
best creature in the world. The wedding was hardly over before the
stepmother's ill-humour broke out. She could not abide the young girl,
whose good qualities made her own daughters appear more detestable.
She employed her in all the meanest work of the house. It was she who
cleaned the plate, and the stairs, who scrubbed Madame's chamber, and
those of Mesdemoiselles, her daughters. She slept at the top of the
house, in a loft, on a wretched straw mattress, while her sisters
occupied rooms, beautifully floored, in which were the most fashionable
beds, and mirrors wherein they could see themselves from head to foot.
The poor girl bore everything with patience, and did not dare complain
to her father, who would only have scolded her, as his wife governed
him entirely. When she had done her work, she went and placed herself
in the chimney-corner, and sat down amongst the cinders, which caused
her to be called by the household in general Cindertail. The second
daughter, however, who was not so rude as her elder sister, called her
Cinderella. Notwithstanding, Cinderella, in her shabby clothes, looked
a thousand times handsomer than her sisters, however magnificently
attired.

It happened that the King's son gave a ball, and invited to it
all persons of quality. Our two young ladies were included in the
invitation, for they cut a great figure in the neighbourhood. Behold
them in great delight, and very busy choosing the most becoming gowns
and head-dresses. A new mortification for Cinderella, for it was she
who ironed her sisters' linen, and set their ruffles. Nothing was
talked of but the style in which they were to be dressed. "I," said
the eldest, "will wear my red velvet dress and my English point-lace
trimmings." "I," said the youngest, "shall only wear my usual
petticoat; but to make up for that, I shall put on my gold-flowered
mantua, and my necklace of diamonds, which are none of the poorest."
They sent for a good milliner to make up their double-frilled caps,
and bought their patches of the best maker. They called Cinderella to
give them her opinion, for she had excellent taste. Cinderella gave
them the best advice in the world, and even offered to dress their
heads for them, which they were very willing she should do; and whilst
she was about it, they said to her, "Cinderella, shouldst thou like
to go to the ball?" "Alas! Mesdemoiselles, you make game of me; that
would not befit me at all." "Thou art right, they would laugh immensely
to see a Cindertail at a ball!" Any other but Cinderella would have
dressed their heads awry, but she was good natured, and dressed them to
perfection. They could eat nothing for nearly two days, so transported
were they with joy. More than a dozen laces were broken in making
their waists as small as possible, and they were always before their
looking-glasses. At last the happy day arrived. They set off, and
Cinderella followed them with her eyes as long as she could. When they
were out of sight, she began to cry. Her godmother, who saw her all in
tears, inquired what ailed her. "I should so like--I should so like--"
she sobbed so much that she could not finish the sentence. "Thou
wouldst so like to go to the ball--Is not that it?" "Alas! yes," said
Cinderella, sighing. "Well, if thou wilt be a good girl, I will take
care thou shalt go." She led her into her chamber, and said to her, "Go
into the garden and bring me a pumpkin." Cinderella went immediately,
gathered the finest she could find, and brought it to her godmother,
unable to guess how the pumpkin could enable her to go to the ball.
Her godmother scooped it out; and, having left nothing but the rind,
struck it with her wand, and the pumpkin was immediately changed into
a beautiful coach gilt all over. She then went and looked into the
mouse-trap, where she found six mice, all alive. She told Cinderella
to lift the door of the mouse-trap a little, and to each mouse, as it
ran out, she gave a tap with her wand, and the mouse was immediately
changed into a fine horse, thereby producing a handsome team of six
horses, of a beautiful dappled mouse-grey colour. As she was in some
difficulty as to what she should make a coachman of, Cinderella said,
"I will go and see if there be not a rat in the rat-trap; we will make
a coachman of him." "Thou art right," said her godmother. "Go and see."
Cinderella brought her the rat-trap, in which there were three great
rats. The Fairy selected one from the three, on account of its ample
beard, and having touched it, it was changed into a fat coachman, who
had the finest moustaches that ever were seen. She then said, "Go into
the garden, thou wilt find there, behind the watering-pot, six lizards,
bring them to me." She had no sooner brought them than the godmother
transformed them into six footmen, who immediately jumped up behind the
coach, with their liveries all covered with lace, and hung on to it as
if they had done nothing else all their lives. The Fairy then said to
Cinderella, "Well, there is something to go to the ball in. Art thou
not well pleased?" "Yes; but am I to go in these dirty clothes?" Her
godmother only touched her with her wand, and in the same instant her
dress was changed to cloth of gold and silver, covered with jewels. She
then gave her a pair of glass slippers, the prettiest in the world.
When she was thus attired, she got into the coach; but her godmother
advised her, above all things, not to stay out past midnight--warning
her, that if she remained at the ball one minute longer, her coach
would again become a pumpkin; her horses, mice; her footmen, lizards;
and her clothes resume their old appearance. She promised her godmother
she would not fail to leave the ball before midnight, and departed, out
of her senses with joy.

The King's son, who was informed that a grand Princess had arrived
whom nobody knew, ran to receive her. He handed her out of the coach
and led her into the hall, where the company was assembled. There was
immediately a dead silence; they stopped dancing, and the fiddlers
ceased to play, so engrossed was every one in the contemplation of the
great attractions of the unknown lady. Nothing was heard but a low
murmur of "Oh! how lovely she is!" The King himself, old as he was,
could not take his eyes from her, and observed to the Queen, that it
was a long time since he had seen so beautiful and so amiable a person.
All the ladies were intently occupied in examining her head-dress
and her clothes, that they might have some like them the very next
day, provided they could find materials as beautiful, and workpeople
sufficiently clever to make them up.

The King's son conducted her to the most honourable seat, and then led
her out to dance. She danced with so much grace that their admiration
of her was increased. A very grand supper was served, of which the
Prince ate not a morsel, so absorbed was he in contemplation of her.
She seated herself beside her sisters, and showed them a thousand
civilities. She shared with them the oranges and citrons which the
Prince had given to her; at which they were much surprised, for she
appeared a perfect stranger to them. Whilst they were in conversation
together, Cinderella heard the clock strike three-quarters past eleven.
She immediately made a profound curtsey to the company, and departed
as quickly as she could. As soon as she had reached home, she went
to find her godmother; and after having thanked her, said she much
wished to go to the ball again the next day, because the King's son
had invited her. While she was occupied in telling her godmother all
that had passed at the ball, the two sisters knocked at the door.
Cinderella went and opened it--"How late you are!" said she to them,
yawning, rubbing her eyes, and stretching herself as if she had but
just awoke. She had not, however, been inclined to sleep since she had
left them. "Hadst thou been at the ball," said one of her sisters to
her, "thou wouldst not have been weary of it. There came to it the most
beautiful Princess--the most beautiful that ever was seen. She paid us
a thousand attentions. She gave us oranges and citrons." Cinderella was
beside herself with delight. She asked them the name of the Princess;
but they replied that nobody knew her; that the King's son was much
puzzled about it, and that he would give everything in the world to
know who she was. Cinderella smiled and said, "She was very handsome,
then? Heavens! how fortunate you are!--Could not I get a sight of her?
Alas! Mademoiselle Javotte, lend me the yellow gown you wear every
day?" "Truly," said Mademoiselle Javotte, "I like that! Lend one's gown
to a dirty Cindertail like you!--I must be very mad indeed!" Cinderella
fully expected this refusal, and was delighted at it, for she would
have been greatly embarrassed if her sister had lent her her gown.

The next day the two sisters went to the ball, and Cinderella also,
but still more splendidly dressed than before. The King's son never
left her side, or ceased saying tender things to her. The young lady
was much amused, and forgot what her godmother had advised her, so
that she heard the clock begin to strike twelve when she did not even
think it was eleven. She rose and fled as lightly as a fawn. The Prince
followed her, but could not overtake her. She dropped one of her glass
slippers, which the Prince carefully picked up. Cinderella reached home
almost breathless, without coach or footmen, and in her shabby clothes,
nothing having remained of all her finery, except one of her little
slippers, the fellow of that she had let fall. The guards at the palace
gate were asked if they had not seen a Princess go out; they answered
that they had seen no one pass but a poorly-dressed girl, who had more
the air of a peasant than of a lady. When the two sisters returned from
the ball, Cinderella asked them if they had been as much entertained as
before, and if the beautiful lady had been present. They said yes, but
that she had fled as soon as it had struck twelve, and so precipitately
that she had let fall one of her little glass slippers, the prettiest
in the world; that the King's son had picked it up; that he had done
nothing but gaze upon it during the remainder of the evening; and
that, undoubtedly, he was very much in love with the beautiful person
to whom the little slipper belonged. They spoke the truth; for a few
days afterwards the King's son caused it to be proclaimed by sound
of trumpet that he would marry her whose foot would exactly match
with the slipper. They began by trying it on the Princesses, then on
the Duchesses, and so on throughout all the Court; but in vain. It
was taken to the two sisters, who did their utmost to force one of
their feet into the slipper, but they could not manage to do so.
Cinderella, who witnessed their efforts and recognised the slipper,
said, laughingly, "Let me see if it will not fit me." Her sisters began
to laugh and ridicule her. The gentleman who had been entrusted to try
the slipper, having attentively looked at Cinderella and found her to
be very handsome, said that it was a very proper request, and that he
had been ordered to try the slipper on all girls without exception. He
made Cinderella sit down, and putting the slipper to her little foot,
he saw it go on easily and fit like wax. Great was the astonishment
of the two sisters, but it was still greater when Cinderella took the
other little slipper out of her pocket and put it on her other foot. At
that moment the godmother arrived, who having given a tap with her wand
to Cinderella's clothes, they became still more magnificent than all
the others she had appeared in. The two sisters then recognised in her
the beautiful person they had seen at the ball. They threw themselves
at her feet to crave her forgiveness for all the ill-treatment she had
suffered from them. Cinderella raised and embracing them, said that she
forgave them with all her heart, and begged them to love her dearly for
the future. They conducted her to the young Prince, dressed just as she
was. He found her handsomer than ever, and a few days afterwards he
married her. Cinderella, who was as kind as she was beautiful, gave her
sisters apartments in the palace, and married them the very same day to
two great lords of the court.

    Beauty in woman is a treasure rare
    Which we are never weary of admiring;
    But a sweet temper is a gift more fair
    And better worth the youthful maid's desiring.
    That was the boon bestowed on Cinderella
    By her wise Godmother--her truest glory.
    The rest was "nought but leather and prunella."
    Such is the moral of this little story--
    Beauties, that charm becomes you more than dress,
    And wins a heart with far greater facility.
    In short, in all things to ensure success,
    The real Fairy gift is Amiability!

ALSO

    Talent, courage, wit, and worth
    Are rare gifts to own on earth.
    But if you want to thrive at court--
    So, at least, the wise report--
    You will find you need some others,
    Such as god-fathers or mothers.




RIQUET WITH THE TUFT.


Once upon a time there was a Queen, who was brought to bed of a son
so ugly and so ill-shaped that it was for a long time doubtful if he
possessed a human form. A Fairy, who was present at his birth, affirmed
that he would not fail to be amiable, as he would have much good-sense.
She added, even, that he would be able, in consequence of the gift she
had endowed him with, to impart equal intelligence to the person he
should love best. All this consoled the poor Queen a little, who was
much distressed at having brought into the world so hideous a little
monkey. It is true that the child was no sooner able to speak than he
said a thousand pretty things, and that there was in all his actions an
indescribable air of intelligence which charmed one. I had forgotten
to say that he was born with a little tuft of hair on his head, which
occasioned him to be named Riquet with the Tuft; for Riquet was the
family name.

At the end of seven or eight years, the Queen of a neighbouring kingdom
was brought to bed of two daughters. The first that came into the
world was fairer than day. The Queen was so delighted, that it was
feared her great joy would prove hurtful to her. The same Fairy who had
assisted at the birth of little Riquet with the Tuft was present upon
this occasion, and to moderate the joy of the Queen, she declared to
her that this little Princess would have no mental capacity, and that
she would be as stupid as she was beautiful. This mortified the Queen
exceedingly; but a few minutes afterwards she experienced a very much
greater annoyance, for the second girl she gave birth to, proved to
be extremely ugly. "Do not distress yourself so much, Madam," said
the Fairy to her. "Your daughter will find compensation; she will have
so much sense that her lack of beauty will scarcely be perceived."
"Heaven send it may be so," replied the Queen; "but are there no means
of giving a little sense to the eldest, who is so lovely?" "I can
do nothing for her, Madam, in the way of wit," said the Fairy, "but
everything in that of beauty; and as there is nothing in my power that
I would not do to gratify you, I will endow her with the ability to
render beautiful the person who shall please her."

As these two Princesses grew up, their endowments increased in the
same proportion, and nothing was talked of anywhere but the beauty of
the eldest and the intelligence of the youngest. It is true that their
defects also greatly increased with their years. The youngest became
uglier every instant, and the eldest more stupid every day. She either
made no answer when she was spoken to, or she said something foolish.
With this she was so awkward, that she could not place four pieces of
china on a mantel-shelf without breaking one of them, nor drink a glass
of water without spilling half of it on her dress. Notwithstanding the
great advantage of beauty to a girl, the youngest bore away the palm
from her sister nearly always, in every society. At first they gathered
round the handsomest, to gaze at and admire her; but they soon left her
for the wittiest, to listen to a thousand agreeable things; and people
were astonished to find that, in less than a quarter of an hour, the
eldest had not a soul near her, and that all the company had formed
a circle round the youngest. The former, though very stupid, noticed
this, and would have given, without regret, all her beauty for half
the sense of her sister. The Queen, discreet as she was, could not
help reproaching her frequently with her folly, which made the poor
Princess ready to die of grief. One day that she had withdrawn into a
wood to bewail her misfortune, she saw a little man approach her, of
most disagreeable appearance, but dressed very magnificently. It was
the young Prince Riquet with the Tuft, who, having fallen in love with
her from seeing her portraits, which were sent all round the world,
had quitted his father's kingdom to have the pleasure of beholding and
speaking to her. Enchanted to meet her thus alone, he accosted her with
all the respect and politeness imaginable. Having remarked, after
paying the usual compliments, that she was very melancholy, he said to
her, "I cannot comprehend, Madam, how a person so beautiful as you are
can be so sad as you appear; for though I may boast of having seen an
infinity of lovely women, I can avouch that I have never beheld one
whose beauty could be compared to yours." "You are pleased to say so,
Sir," replied the Princess; and there she stopped. "Beauty," continued
Riquet, "is so great an advantage, that it ought to surpass all others;
and when one possesses it, I do not see anything that could very much
distress you." "I had rather," said the Princess, "be as ugly as you,
and have good sense, than possess the beauty I do, and be as stupid
as I am." "There is no greater proof of good sense, Madam, than the
belief that we have it not; it is the nature of that gift, that the
more we have, the more we believe we are deficient of it." "I do not
know how that may be," said the Princess, "but I know well enough that
I am very stupid, and that is the cause of the grief which is killing
me." "If that is all that afflicts you, Madam, I can easily put an end
to your sorrow." "And how would you do that?" said the Princess. "I
have the power, Madam," said Riquet with the Tuft, "to give as much
wit as any one can possess to the person I love the most; and as you,
Madam, are that person, it will depend entirely upon yourself whether
or not you will have so much wit, provided that you are willing to
marry me." The Princess was thunderstruck, and replied not a word. "I
see," said Riquet with the Tuft, "that this proposal pains you; and I
am not surprised at it; but I give you a full year to consider of it."
The Princess had so little sense, and at the same time was so anxious
to have a great deal, that she thought the end of that year would never
come; so she accepted at once the offer that was made her. She had no
sooner promised Riquet with the Tuft that she would marry him that day
twelve months, than she felt herself to be quite another person to what
she was previously. She found she possessed an incredible facility of
saying anything she wished, and of saying it in a shrewd, yet easy and
natural manner. She commenced on the instant, and kept up a sprightly
conversation with Riquet with the Tuft, during which she chatted away
at such a rate, that Riquet with the Tuft began to believe he had given
her more wit than he had kept for himself. When she returned to the
Palace, the whole Court was puzzled to account for a change so sudden
and extraordinary, for in proportion to the number of foolish things
they had heard her say formerly, were the sensible and exceedingly
clever observations she now gave utterance to. All the Court was in a
state of joy which is not to be conceived. The younger sister alone
was not very much pleased, as no longer possessing over her elder
sister the advantage of wit, she now only appeared, by her side,
as a very disagreeable-looking person. The King was now led by his
eldest daughter's advice, and sometimes even held his Council in her
apartment. The news of this alteration having spread abroad, all the
young Princes of the neighbouring kingdoms exerted themselves to obtain
her affection, and nearly all of them asked her hand in marriage; but
she found none of them sufficiently intelligent, and she listened to
all of them without engaging herself to any one.

At length arrived a Prince so rich, so witty, and so handsome, that
she could not help feeling an inclination for him. Her father, having
perceived it, told her that he left her at perfect liberty to choose a
husband for herself, and that she had only to make known her decision.
As the more sense we possess, the more difficulty we find in making up
one's mind positively on such a matter, she requested, after having
thanked her father, that he would allow her some time to think of it.
She went, by chance, to walk in the same wood where she had met with
Riquet with the Tuft, in order to ponder with greater freedom on what
she had to do. While she was walking, deep in thought, she heard a dull
sound beneath her feet, as of many persons running to and fro, and
busily occupied. Having listened more attentively, she heard one say,
"Bring me that saucepan;" another, "Give me that kettle;" another, "Put
some wood on the fire." At the same moment the ground opened, and she
saw beneath her what appeared to be a large kitchen, full of cooks,
scullions, and all sorts of servants necessary for the preparation of a
magnificent banquet. There came forth a band of from twenty to thirty
cooks, who went and established themselves in an avenue of the wood
at a very long table, and who, each with larding-pin in hand and _the
queue de renard_[7] behind the ear, set to work, keeping time to a
melodious song.

The Princess, astonished at this sight, inquired for whom they were
working. "Madam," replied the most prominent of the troop, "for Prince
Riquet with the Tuft, whose marriage will take place to-morrow." The
Princess, still more surprised than she was before, and suddenly
recollecting that it was just a twelvemonth from the day on which
she had promised to marry Prince Riquet with the Tuft, was lost in
amazement. The cause of her not having remembered her promise was, that
when she made it she was a fool, and on receiving her new mind, she
forgot all her follies. She had not taken thirty steps in continuation
of her walk, when Riquet with the Tuft presented himself before her,
gaily and magnificently attired, like a Prince about to be married.
"You see, Madam," said he, "I keep my word punctually, and I doubt not
but that you have come hither to keep yours, and to make me, by the
gift of your hand, the happiest of men." "I confess to you, frankly,"
replied the Princess, "that I have not yet made up my mind on that
matter, and that I do not think I shall ever be able to do so to your
satisfaction." "You astonish me, Madam," said Riquet with the Tuft.
"I have no doubt I do," said the Princess; "and assuredly, had I to
deal with a stupid person--a man without mind,--I should feel greatly
embarrassed. 'A Princess is bound by her word,' he would say to me,
'and you must marry me, as you have promised to do so.' But as the
person to whom I speak is the most sensible man in all the world, I
am certain he will listen to reason. You know that, when I was no
better than a fool, I nevertheless could not resolve to marry you--how
can you expect, now that I have the sense which you have given me,
and which renders me much more difficult to please than before, that
I should take a resolution to-day which I could not do then? If you
seriously thought of marrying me, you did very wrong to take away
my stupidity, and enable me to see clearer than I saw then." "If a
man without sense," replied Riquet with the Tuft, "should meet with
some indulgence, as you have just intimated, had he to reproach you
with your breach of promise, why would you, Madam, that I should not
be equally so in a matter which affects the entire happiness of my
life? Is it reasonable that persons of intellect should be in a worse
condition than those that have none? Can you assert this--you who have
so much and have so earnestly desired to possess it? But let us come to
the point, if you please. With the exception of my ugliness, is there
anything in me that displeases you? Are you dissatisfied with my birth,
my understanding, my temper, or my manners?"

"Not in the least," replied the Princess; "I admire in you everything
you have mentioned." "If so," rejoined Riquet with the Tuft, "I shall
be happy, as you have it in your power to make me the most agreeable
of men." "How can that be done?" said the Princess. "It can be done,"
said Riquet with the Tuft, "if you love me sufficiently to wish that
it should be. And in order, Madam, that you should have no doubt about
it, know that the same fairy, who, on the day I was born, endowed me
with the power to give understanding to the person I chose, gave you
also the power to render handsome the man you should love, and on whom
you were desirous to bestow that favour." "If such be the fact," said
the Princess, "I wish, with all my heart, that you should become the
handsomest Prince in the world, and I bestow the gift on you to the
fullest extent in my power."

The Princess had no sooner pronounced these words, than Riquet with the
Tuft appeared to her eyes, of all men in the world, the handsomest,
the best made, and most amiable she had ever seen. There are some who
assert that it was not the spell of the Fairy, but love alone that
caused this metamorphosis. They say that the Princess, having reflected
on the perseverance of her lover--on his prudence, and all the good
qualities of his heart and mind, no longer saw the deformity of his
body nor the ugliness of his features--that his hunch appeared to her
nothing more than the effect of a man shrugging his shoulders, and that
instead of observing, as she had done, that he limped horribly, she saw
in him no more than a certain lounging air, which charmed her. They say
also that his eyes, which squinted, seemed to her only more brilliant
from that defect, which passed in her mind for a proof of the intensity
of his love, and, in fine, that his great red nose had in it something
martial and heroic. However this may be, the Princess promised on
the spot to marry him, provided he obtained the consent of the King,
her Father. The King, having learned that his daughter entertained a
great regard for Riquet with the Tuft, whom he knew also to be a very
clever and wise prince, accepted him with pleasure for a son-in-law.
The wedding took place the next morning, as Riquet with the Tuft had
foreseen, and, according to the instructions which he had given a long
time before.

    No beauty, no talent, has power above
    Some indefinite charm discern'd only by love.


FOOTNOTES:

[7] See Appendix.




LITTLE THUMBLING.


Once upon a time there was a Woodcutter and his wife who had seven
children, all boys; the eldest was but ten years old, and the youngest
only seven. People wondered that the Woodcutter had had so many
children in so short a time; but the fact is, that his wife not only
had them very fast, but seldom presented him with less than two at a
birth. They were very poor, and their seven children troubled them
greatly, as not one of them was yet able to gain his livelihood. What
grieved them still more was that the youngest was very delicate, and
seldom spoke, which they considered a proof of stupidity instead of
good sense. He was very diminutive, and, when first born, scarcely
bigger than one's thumb, which caused them to call him Little Thumbling.

This poor child was the scapegoat of the house, and was blamed for
everything that happened. Nevertheless he was the shrewdest and most
sensible of all his brothers, and if he spoke little, he listened
a great deal. There came a very bad harvest, and the famine was so
severe that these poor people determined to get rid of their children.
One evening, when they were all in bed, and the Woodman was sitting
over the fire with his wife, he said to her, with an aching heart,
"Thou seest clearly that we can no longer find food for our children.
I cannot let them die of hunger before my eyes, and I am resolved to
lose them to-morrow in the wood, which will be easily done, for whilst
they are occupied in tying up the faggots, we have but to make off
unobserved by them." "Ah!" exclaimed the Woodcutter's wife, "Canst
thou have the heart to lose thine own children?" Her husband in vain
represented to her their exceeding poverty; she could not consent to
the deed. She was poor, but she was their mother. Having, however,
reflected on the misery it would occasion her to see them die of
hunger, she at length assented, and went to bed weeping.

Little Thumbling heard everything they had said, for having
ascertained, as he lay in his bed, that they were talking of their
affairs, he got up quietly, and slipped under his father's stool to
listen, without being seen. He went to bed again, and slept not a wink
the rest of the night, thinking what he should do. He rose early and
repaired to the banks of a rivulet, where he filled his pockets with
small white pebbles, and then returned home. They set out all together,
and Little Thumbling said nothing of what he had heard to his brothers.
They entered a very thick forest, wherein, at ten paces distant, they
could not see one another. The Woodcutter began to cut wood, and
his children to pick up sticks to make faggots with. The father and
mother, seeing them occupied with their work, stole away gradually, and
then fled suddenly by a small winding path. When the children found
themselves all alone, they began to scream and cry with all their
might. Little Thumbling let them scream, well knowing how he could
get home again, for as he came he had dropped all along the road the
little white pebbles he had in his pockets. He said to them then, "Fear
nothing, brothers, my father and mother have left us here, but I will
take you safely home, only follow me." They followed him, and he led
them back to the house by the same road that they had taken into the
forest. They feared to enter immediately, but placed themselves close
to the door to listen to the conversation of their father and mother.

Just at the moment that the Woodcutter and his wife arrived at home,
the lord of the manor sent them ten crowns which he had owed them a
long time, and which they had given up all hope of receiving. This was
new life to them, for these poor people were actually starving. The
Woodcutter sent his wife to the butcher's immediately. As it was many
a day since they had tasted meat, she bought three times as much as
was necessary for the supper of two persons. When they had satisfied
their hunger, the Woodcutter's wife said, "Alas! where now are our
poor children; they would fare merrily on what we have left. But it
was thou, Guillaume, who wouldst lose them. Truly did I say we should
repent it. What are they now doing in the forest! Alas! Heaven help
me! the wolves have, perhaps, already devoured them! Inhuman that thou
art, thus to have destroyed thy children!" The Woodcutter began to lose
his temper, for she repeated more than twenty times that they should
repent it, and that she had said they would. He threatened to beat her
if she did not hold her tongue. It was not that the Woodcutter was
not, perhaps, even more sorry than his wife, but that she made such a
noise about it, and that he was like many other men who are very fond
of women who can talk well, but are exceedingly annoyed by those whose
words always come true. The wife was all in tears. "Alas! where are
now my children, my poor children?" She uttered this, at length, so
loudly, that the children, who were at the door, heard her, and began
to cry altogether, "We are here! we are here!" She ran quickly to open
the door to them, and, embracing them, exclaimed, "How happy I am to
see you again, my dear children; you are very tired and hungry. And how
dirty thou art, Pierrot; come here and let me wash thee." Pierrot was
her eldest son, and she loved him better than all the rest because he
was rather red-headed, and she was slightly so herself. They sat down
to supper, and ate with an appetite that delighted their father and
mother, to whom they related how frightened they were in the forest,
speaking almost always all together. The good folks were enchanted to
see their children once more around them, and their joy lasted as long
as the ten crowns; but when the money was spent they relapsed into
their former misery, and resolved to lose the children again, and to do
so effectually they determined to lead them much further from home than
they had done the first time.

They could not talk of this so privately, but that they were overheard
by Little Thumbling, who reckoned upon getting out of the scrape by the
same means as before; but though he got up very early to collect the
little pebbles, he could not succeed in his object, for he found the
house door double locked. He knew not what to do, when the Woodcutter's
wife, having given them each a piece of bread for their breakfast, it
occurred to him that he might make the bread supply the place of the
pebbles by strewing crumbs of it along the path as they went, and so
he put his piece in his pocket. The father and mother led them into
the thickest and darkest part of the forest; and as soon as they had
done so, they gained a by-path, and left them there. Little Thumbling
did not trouble himself much, for he believed he should easily find
his way back by means of the bread which he had scattered wherever he
had passed; but he was greatly surprised at not being able to find a
single crumb. The birds had eaten it all up! Behold the poor children
then, in great distress, for the further they wandered the deeper they
plunged into the forest. Night came on, and a great wind arose, which
terrified them horribly. They fancied they heard on every side nothing
but the howling of wolves, hastening to devour them. They scarcely
dared to speak or look behind them. It then began to rain so heavily
that they were soon drenched to the skin; they slipped at every step,
tumbling into the mud, out of which they scrambled in a filthy state,
not knowing what to do with their hands. Little Thumbling climbed up
a tree to try if he could see anything from the top of it. Having
looked all about him, he saw a little light like that of a candle,
but it was a long way on the other side of the forest. He came down
again, and when he had reached the ground he could see the light no
longer. This distressed him greatly; but having walked on with his
brothers for some time in the direction of the light, he saw it again
on emerging from the wood. At length they reached the house where the
light was, not without many alarms, for they often lost sight of it,
and always when they descended into the valleys. They knocked loudly at
the door, and a good woman came to open it. She asked them what they
wanted. Little Thumbling told her they were poor children who had lost
their way in the forest, and who begged a night's lodging for charity.
The woman, seeing they were all so pretty, began to weep, and said
to them, "Alas! my poor children, whither have you come? Know that
this is the dwelling of an Ogre who eats little boys!" "Alas, Madam!"
replied Little Thumbling, who trembled from head to foot, as did all
his brothers; "what shall we do?--It is certain that the wolves of the
forest will not fail to devour us to-night, if you refuse to receive us
under your roof, and that being the case, we had rather be eaten by
the gentleman; perhaps he may have pity upon us, if you are kind enough
to ask him." The Ogre's wife, who fancied she could contrive to hide
them from her husband till the next morning, allowed them to come in,
and led them where they could warm themselves by a good fire, for there
was a whole sheep on the spit roasting for the Ogre's supper. Just as
they were beginning to get warm, they heard two or three loud knocks
at the door. It was the Ogre who had come home. His wife immediately
made the children hide under the bed, and went to open the door. The
Ogre first asked if his supper was ready and if she had drawn the wine,
and with that he sat down to his meal. The mutton was all but raw, but
he liked it all the better for that. He sniffed right and left, saying
that he smelt fresh meat. "It must be the calf I have just skinned that
you smell," said his wife. "I smell fresh meat, I tell you once more,"
replied the Ogre, looking askance at his wife; "there is something
here that I don't understand." In saying these words, he rose from the
table and went straight to the bed--"Ah!" he exclaimed, "it is thus,
then, thou wouldst deceive me, cursed woman! I know not what hinders me
from eating thee also! It is well for thee that thou art an old beast!
Here is some game, which comes in good time for me to entertain three
Ogres of my acquaintance who are coming to see me in a day or two." He
dragged them from under the bed one after the other. The poor children
fell on their knees, begging mercy; but they had to deal with the
most cruel of all the Ogres, and who, far from feeling pity for them,
devoured them already with his eyes, and said to his wife they would be
dainty bits, when she had made a good sauce for them. He went to fetch
a great knife, and as he returned to the poor children, he whetted it
on a long stone that he held in his left hand. He had already seized
one, when his wife said to him, "What would you do at this hour of the
night? will it not be time enough to-morrow?" "Hold thy peace," replied
the Ogre, "they will be the more tender." "But you have already so
much meat," returned his wife; "Here is a calf, two sheep, and half a
pig." "Thou art right," said the Ogre; "give them a good supper, that
they may not fall away, and then put them to bed." The good woman was
enchanted, and brought them plenty for supper, but they couldn't eat,
they were so paralysed with fright. As for the Ogre, he seated himself
to drink again, delighted to think he had such a treat in store for his
friends. He drained a dozen goblets more than usual, which affected his
head a little, and obliged him to go to bed.

The Ogre had seven daughters who were still in their infancy. These
little Ogresses had the most beautiful complexions, in consequence of
their eating raw flesh like their father; but they had very small,
round, grey eyes, hooked noses, and very large mouths, with long teeth,
exceedingly sharp, and wide apart. They were not very vicious as yet;
but they promised fairly to be so, for they already began to bite
little children, in order to suck their blood. They had been sent to
bed early, and were all seven in a large bed, having each a crown of
gold on her head. In the same room was another bed of the same size.
It was in this bed that the Ogre's wife put the seven little boys to
sleep, after which she went to sleep with her husband.

Little Thumbling, who had remarked that the Ogre's daughters had golden
crowns on their heads, and who feared that the Ogre might regret that
he had not killed him and his brothers that evening, got up in the
middle of the night, and, taking off his own nightcap and those of his
brothers, went very softly and placed them on the heads of the Ogre's
seven daughters, after having taken off their golden crowns, which he
put on his brothers and himself, in order that the Ogre might mistake
them for his daughters, and his daughters for the boys whose throats he
longed to cut.

Matters turned out exactly as he anticipated, for the Ogre awaking at
midnight, regretted having deferred till the morning what he might
have done the evening before. He therefore jumped suddenly out of bed,
and seizing his great knife, "Let us go," said he, "and see how our
young rogues are by this time; we won't make two bites at a cherry."
Therewith he stole on tiptoes up to his daughters' bed-room, and
approached the bed in which lay the little boys, who were all asleep
except Thumbling, who was dreadfully frightened when the Ogre placed
his hand upon his head to feel it, as he had in turn felt those of all
his brothers.

The Ogre, who felt the golden crowns, said, "Truly, I was about to do
a pretty job! It's clear I must have drunk too much last night." He
then went to the bed where his daughters slept, and having felt the
little nightcaps that belonged to the boys. "Aha!" cried he. "Here
are our young wags! Let us to work boldly!" So saying, he cut without
hesitation the throats of his seven daughters. Well satisfied with this
exploit, he returned and stretched himself beside his wife. As soon as
Little Thumbling heard the Ogre snoring, he woke his brothers, and bade
them dress themselves quickly and follow him. They went down softly
into the garden and jumped over the wall. They ran nearly all night
long, trembling all the way, and not knowing whither they were going.

The Ogre, awaking in the morning, said to his wife, "Get thee up stairs
and dress the little rogues you took in last night." The Ogress was
astonished at the kindness of her husband, never suspecting the sort
of dressing he meant her to give them, and fancying he ordered her to
go and put on their clothes; she went up stairs, where she was greatly
surprised to find her daughters murdered and swimming in their blood.
The first thing she did was to faint (for it is the first thing that
almost all women do in similar circumstances). The Ogre, fearing that
his wife would be too long about the job he had given her to do, went
upstairs to help her. He was not less surprised than his wife, when he
beheld this frightful spectacle. "Hah! what have I done?" he exclaimed.
"The wretches shall pay for it, and instantly!" He then threw a jugfull
of water in his wife's face, and having brought her to, said, "Quick!
give me my seven-league boots, that I may go and catch them." He set
out, and after running in every direction, came at last upon the track
of the poor children, who were not more than a hundred yards from their
father's house. They saw the Ogre striding from hill to hill, and who
stepped over rivers as easily as if they were the smallest brooks.
Little Thumbling, who perceived a hollow rock close by where they were,
hid his brothers in it, and crept in after them, watching all the while
the progress of the Ogre. The Ogre, feeling very tired with his long
journey to no purpose (for seven-league boots are very fatiguing to the
wearer), was inclined to rest, and by chance sat down on the very rock
in which the little boys had concealed themselves. As he was quite worn
out, he had not rested long before he fell asleep, and began to snore
so dreadfully that the poor children were not less frightened than they
were when he took up the great knife to cut their throats.

Little Thumbling was not so much alarmed, and told his brothers to run
quickly into the house while the Ogre was sound asleep, and not to
be uneasy about him. They took his advice and speedily reached home.
Little Thumbling having approached the Ogre, gently pulled off his
boots, and put them on directly. The boots were very large and very
long; but as they were fairy boots, they possessed the quality of
increasing or diminishing in size according to the leg of the person
who wore them, so that they fitted him as perfectly as if they had been
made for him. He went straight to the Ogre's house, where he found his
wife weeping over her murdered daughters. "Your husband," said Little
Thumbling to her, "is in great danger, for he has been seized by a band
of robbers, who have sworn to kill him if he does not give them all his
gold and silver. At the moment they had their daggers at his throat
he perceived me, and entreated me to come and tell you the situation
he was in, and bid you give me all his ready cash, without keeping
back any of it, as otherwise they will kill him without mercy. As time
pressed, he insisted I should take his seven-league boots, which you
see I have on, in order that I might make haste, and also that you
might be sure I was not imposing upon you."

The good woman, very much alarmed, immediately gave him all the money
she could find, for the Ogre was not a bad husband to her, although he
ate little children. Little Thumbling, thus laden with all the wealth
of the Ogre, hastened back to his father's house, where he was received
with great joy.

There are many persons who differ in their account of this part of
the story, and who pretend that Little Thumbling never committed this
robbery, and that he only considered himself justified in taking the
Ogre's seven-league boots, because he used them expressly to run after
little children. These people assert that they have heard it from good
authority, and that they have even eaten and drunk in the Woodcutter's
house. They assure us that when Little Thumbling had put on the Ogre's
boots, he went to Court, where he knew they were in much trouble about
an army which was within two hundred leagues of them, and anxious to
learn the success of a battle that had been fought. They say he went
to seek the King, and told him that if he desired it, he would bring
him back news of the army before the end of the day. The King promised
him a large sum of money if he did so. Little Thumbling brought news
that very evening, and this first journey having made him known, he
got whatever he chose to ask; for the King paid most liberally for
taking his orders to the army, and numberless ladies gave him anything
he chose for news of their lovers, and they were his best customers.
He occasionally met with some wives who entrusted him with letters
for their husbands, but they paid him so poorly, and the amount was
altogether so trifling, that he did not condescend to put down amongst
his receipts what he got for that service. After he had been a courier
for some time, and saved a great deal of money, he returned to his
father, where it is impossible to imagine the joy of his family at
seeing him again. He made them all comfortable. He bought newly-made
offices for his father and his brothers, and by these means established
them all, making his own way at Court at the same time.

    Often is the handsome boy
    Made, alone, his father's joy;
    While the tiny, timid child
    Is neglected or reviled.
    Notwithstanding, sometimes he
    Lives, of all, the prop to be.




THE COUNTESS DE MURAT.




PERFECT LOVE.


In one of those agreeable countries subject to the Empire of the
Fairies, reigned the redoubtable Danamo. She was learned in her art,
cruel in her deeds, and proud of the honour of being descended from
the celebrated Calypso, whose charms had the glory and the power, by
detaining the famous Ulysses, to triumph over the prudence of the
conquerors of Troy.

She was tall, fierce-looking, and her haughty spirit had with much
difficulty been subjected to the rigid laws of Hymen. Love had never
been able to reach her heart, but the idea of uniting a flourishing
kingdom to that of which she was Queen, and another which she had
usurped, had induced her to marry an old monarch, who was one of her
neighbours.

He died a few years after his marriage, and left the Queen with one
daughter, named Azire. She was exceedingly ugly, but did not appear so
in the eyes of Danamo, who thought her charming, perhaps because she
was the very image of herself. She was heiress also to three kingdoms,
a circumstance which softened down many defects, and her hand was
sought in marriage by all the most powerful princes of the adjacent
provinces. Their eagerness, joined to the blind affection of Danamo,
rendered her vanity insupportable. She was ardently besought--she must,
therefore, be worthy of such solicitation. It was thus that the Fairy
and the Princess reasoned in their own minds, and enjoyed the pleasure
of deceiving themselves. Meanwhile, Danamo thought only of rendering
the happiness of the Princess as perfect as she considered was her due,
and, with this object, brought up in her palace a young Prince, the son
of her brother.

His name was Parcin Parcinet. He had a noble bearing, a graceful
figure, a profusion of beautiful fair hair. Love might have been
jealous of his power, for that deity had never, amongst his
golden-pointed arrows, any so certain to triumph irresistibly over
hearts as the fine eyes of Parcin Parcinet. He could do everything well
that he chose to undertake--danced and sang to perfection, and bore
off all the prizes in the tournament whenever he took the trouble to
contend for them.

This young Prince was the delight of the Court, and Danamo, who had her
motives for it, made no objection to the homage and admiration which he
received.

The King who was the father of Parcinet was the Fairy's brother. She
declared war against him without even seeking for a reason. The King
fought valiantly, at the head of his troops; but what could any army
effect against the power of so skilful a Fairy as Danamo? She allowed
the victory to remain in doubt only long enough for her unfortunate
brother to fall in the combat. As soon as he was dead, she dispersed
all her enemies with one stroke of her wand, and made herself mistress
of the kingdom.

Parcin Parcinet was at that time still in his cradle. They brought him
to Danamo. It would have been in vain to attempt hiding him from a
Fairy. He already displayed those seductive graces which win the heart.
Danamo caressed him, and a few days afterwards took him with her to her
own dominions.

The Prince had attained the age of eighteen, when the Fairy, desirous
at length of executing the designs which she had so many years
contemplated, resolved to marry Parcin Parcinet to the Princess, her
daughter. She never for a moment doubted the infinite delight which
that young Prince, born to a throne, and condemned by misfortune to
remain a subject, would feel at becoming in one day the sovereign of
three kingdoms. She sent for the Princess, and revealed to her the
choice she had made of a husband for her. The Princess listened to
this disclosure with an emotion which caused the Fairy to believe that
this resolution in favour of Parcin Parcinet was not agreeable to
her daughter. "I see clearly," she said to her, as she perceived her
agitation increasing, "that thou hast much more ambition, and wouldst
unite with thine own empire that of one of those kings who have so
often proposed for thee; but where is the King whom Parcin Parcinet
cannot conquer? In courage he surpasses them all. The subjects of so
perfect a prince might one day rebel in his favour. In giving thee to
him I secure to thee the possession of his kingdom. As to his person,
it is unnecessary to speak--thou knowest that the proudest beauties
have not been able to resist his charms." The Princess, suddenly
flinging herself at the feet of the Fairy, interrupted her discourse,
and confessed to her that her heart had not been able to defy the young
victor, famous for so many conquests. "But," added she, blushing, "I
have given a thousand proofs of my affection to the insensible Parcin
Parcinet, and he has received them with a coldness which distracts me."
"'Tis because he dares not raise his thoughts so high as thee," replied
the haughty Fairy. "He fears, no doubt, to offend me, and I appreciate
his respect."

This flattering idea was too agreeable to the inclination and the
vanity of the Princess for her not to be persuaded of its truth. The
Fairy ended by sending for Parcin Parcinet. He came, and found her in
a magnificent cabinet, where she awaited him with the Princess, her
daughter. "Call all thy courage to thy assistance," said she to him as
soon as he appeared--"not to support affliction, but to prevent being
overcome by thy good fortune. Thou art called to a throne, Parcin
Parcinet, and to crown thy happiness, thou wilt mount that throne by
espousing my daughter." "I, Madam!" exclaimed the young Prince, with an
astonishment in which it was easy to perceive that joy had no share, "I
espouse the Princess," continued he, retreating a few paces. "Hah! what
deity is meddling with my fate? Why does he not leave the care of it to
the only one from whom I implore assistance?"

These words were uttered by the Prince with a vehemence in which
his heart took too much part to allow it to be controlled by his
prudence. The Fairy imagined that the unhoped-for happiness had driven
Parcin Parcinet out of his wits; but the Princess loved him, and love
sometimes renders lovers more keen sighted than even wisdom. "From
what deity, Parcin Parcinet," said she to him with emotion, "do you
implore assistance so fondly? I feel too deeply that I have no share
in the prayers you address to him." The young Prince, who had had
time to recover from his first surprise, and who was conscious of the
imprudence he had committed, summoned his brain to the assistance
of his heart. He answered the Princess with more gallantry than she
had hoped for, and thanked the Fairy with an air of dignity that
sufficiently proved him to be worthy not only of the empire that was
offered him, but of that of the whole world.

Danamo and her proud daughter were satisfied with his expressions,
and they settled everything before they left the apartment, the Fairy
deferring the wedding-day a short time, only to give opportunity to all
her Court to prepare for this grand solemnity.

The news of the marriage of Parcin Parcinet and Azire was spread
throughout the Palace the moment they had quitted the Queen's cabinet.
Crowds came to congratulate the Prince. However unamiable the Princess,
it was to high fortune she conducted him. Parcin Parcinet received
all these honours with an air of indifference, which surprised his
new subjects the more, for that they detected beneath it extreme
affliction and anxiety. He was compelled, however, to endure for the
rest of the day the eager homage of the whole Court, and the ceaseless
demonstrations of affection lavished upon him by Azire.

What a situation for a young Prince, a prey to the keenest anguish.
Night seemed to him to have delayed its return a thousand times longer
than usual. The impatient Parcin Parcinet prayed for its arrival.
It came at length. He quitted precipitately the place in which he
had suffered so much. He retired to his own apartments, and, having
dismissed his attendants, opened a door which led into the Palace
Gardens, and hurried through them, followed only by a young slave.

A beautiful, but not very extensive, river ran at the end of the
gardens, and separated from the magnificent Palace of the Fairy a
little Château, flanked by four towers, and surrounded by a tolerably
deep moat, which was filled by the river aforesaid. It was to this
fatal spot that the vows and sighs of Parcin Parcinet were incessantly
wafted.

What a miracle was confined in it! Danamo had the treasure carefully
guarded within it. It was a young Princess, the daughter of her
sister, who, dying, had confided her to the charge of the Fairy. Her
beauty, worthy the admiration of the universe, appeared too dangerous
to Danamo to allow her to be seen by the side of Azire. Permission was
occasionally accorded to the charming Irolite (so was she named), to
come to the Palace, to visit the Fairy and the Princess her daughter,
but she had never been allowed to appear in public. Her dawning
beauties were unknown to the world, but there was one who was not
ignorant of them. They had met the eyes of Parcin Parcinet one day at
the apartments of the Princess Azire, and he had adored Irolite from
the moment that he had seen her. Their near relationship afforded no
privilege to that young Prince; from the time Irolite ceased to be an
infant the pitiless Danamo suffered no one to behold her.

Nevertheless Parcin Parcinet burned with a flame as ardent as such
charms as Irolite's could not fail to kindle. She was just fourteen.
Her beauty was perfect. Her hair was of a charming colour. Without
being decidedly dark or fair, her complexion had all the freshness
of spring. Her mouth was lovely, her teeth admirable, her smile
fascinating. She had large hazel eyes, sparkling and tender, and her
glances appeared to say a thousand things which her young heart was
ignorant of.

She had been brought up in complete solitude. Near as was the Palace of
the Fairy to the Château in which she dwelt, she saw no more persons
than she might have seen in the midst of deserts. Danamo's orders to
this effect were strictly followed. The lovely Irolite passed her days
amongst the women appointed to attend her. They were few in number,
but little as were the advantages to be gained in so solitary and
circumscribed a Court, Fame, which feared not Danamo, published such
wonders of this young Princess, that ladies of the highest rank were
eager to share the seclusion of the youthful Irolite. Her appearance
confirmed all that Fame had reported. They were always finding some new
charm to admire in her.

A governess of great intelligence and prudence, formerly attached to
the Princess who was the mother of Irolite, had been allowed to remain
with her, and frequently bewailed the rigorous conduct of Danamo
towards her young mistress. Her name was Mana. Her desire to restore
the Princess to the liberty she was entitled to enjoy, and the position
she was born to occupy, had induced her to favour the love of Parcin
Parcinet. It was now three years since he had contrived to introduce
himself one evening into the Château in the dress of a slave. He found
Irolite in the garden, and declared his passion for her. She was then
but a charming child. She loved Parcin Parcinet as if he had been her
brother, and could not then comprehend the existence of any warmer
attachment. Mana, who was rarely absent from the side of Irolite,
surprised the young Prince in the garden; he avowed to her his love
for the Princess, and the determination he had formed to perish, or
to restore her one day to liberty, and then to seek, by a personal
appeal to his former subjects, a glorious means of revenging himself on
Danamo, and of placing Irolite upon the throne.

The noble qualities which were daily developed in the nature of
Parcin Parcinet, might have rendered probable his success in still
more difficult undertakings, and it was also the only hope of rescue
which offered itself to Irolite. Mana allowed him to visit the Château
occasionally after nightfall. He saw Irolite only in her presence, but
he spoke to her of his love, and never ceased endeavouring, by tender
words and devoted attentions, to inspire her with a passion as ardent
as his own. For three years Parcin Parcinet had been occupied solely
with this passion. Nearly every night he visited the Château of his
Princess, and all his days he passed in thinking of her. We left him on
his road through Danamo's gardens, followed by a slave, and absorbed in
the despair to which the determination of the Fairy had reduced him. He
reached the river's bank: a little gilded boat, moored to the shore,
in which Azire sometimes enjoyed an excursion on the water, enabled
the enamoured Prince to cross the stream. The slave rowed him over,
and as soon as Parcin Parcinet had ascended the silken ladder which
was thrown to him from a little terrace that extended along the entire
front of the Château, the faithful servant rowed the boat back to its
mooring-place, and remained with it there until a signal was made to
him by his master. This was the waving, for a few minutes, of a lighted
flambeau on the terrace.

This evening the Prince took his usual route, the silken ladder was
thrown to him, and he reached, without any obstacle, the apartment of
the youthful Irolite. He found her stretched on a couch, and bathed
in tears. How beautiful did she appear to him in her affliction. Her
charms had never before affected the young Prince so deeply.

"What is the matter, my Princess?" asked he, flinging himself on his
knees before the couch on which she lay. "What can have caused these
precious tears to flow? Alas!" he continued, sighing, "have I still
more misfortunes to learn here?" The young lovers mingled their tears
and sighs, and were forced to give full vent to their sorrow before
they could find words to declare its cause. At length the young Prince
entreated Irolite to tell him what new severity the Fairy had treated
her with. "She would compel you to marry Azire," replied the beautiful
Irolite, blushing; "which of all her cruelties could cause me so much
agony?" "Ah! my dear Princess," exclaimed the Prince, "you fear I
shall marry Azire! My lot is a thousand times more happy than I could
have imagined it!" "Can you exult in your destiny," sadly rejoined
the Princess, "when it threatens to separate us? I cannot express to
you the tortures that I suffer from this fear! Ah, Parcin Parcinet,
you were right! The love I bear to you is far different from that I
should feel for a brother!" The enamoured Prince blessed Fortune for
her severities; never before had the young heart of Irolite appeared
to him truly touched by love, and now he could no longer doubt having
inspired her with a passion as tender as his own. This unlooked-for
happiness renewed all his hopes. "No!" he exclaimed with rapture; "I no
longer despair of overcoming our difficulties, since I am convinced of
your affection. Let us fly, my Princess. Let us escape from the fury of
Danamo and her hateful daughter. Let us seek a home more favourable to
the indulgence of that love, in which alone consists our happiness!"
"How!" rejoined the young Princess with astonishment. "Depart with you!
And what would all the kingdom say of my flight?" "Away with such idle
fears, beautiful Irolite," interrupted the impatient Parcin Parcinet,
"everything urges us to quit this spot. Let us hasten--" "But whither?"
asked the prudent Mana, who had been present during the entire
interview, and who, less pre-occupied than these young lovers, foresaw
all the difficulties in the way of their flight. "I have plans which I
will lay before you," answered Parcin Parcinet; "but how did you become
so soon acquainted here with the news of the Fairy's Court?" "One of
my relatives," replied Mana, "wrote to me the instant that the rumour
was circulated through the Palace, and I thought it my duty to inform
the Princess." "What have I not suffered since that moment!" said the
lovely Irolite. "No, Parcin Parcinet, I cannot live without you!" The
young Prince, in a transport of love, and enchanted by these words,
imprinted on the beautiful hand of Irolite a passionate and tender
kiss, which had all the charms of a first and precious favour. The day
began to dawn, and warned Parcinet, too soon, that it was time for
him to retire. He promised the Princess he would return the following
night to reveal his plans for their escape. He found his faithful
slave in waiting with the boat, and returned to his apartments. He was
enraptured with the delight of being beloved by the fair Irolite, and
agitated by the obstacles which he clearly perceived would have to be
surmounted, sleep could neither calm his anxiety, nor make him for one
moment forget his happiness.

The morning sun had scarcely lighted his chamber, when a dwarf
presented him with a magnificent scarf from the Princess Azire, who in
a note, more tender than Parcin Parcinet would have desired, entreated
him to wear it constantly from that moment. He returned an answer which
it embarrassed him much to compose; but Irolite was to be rescued,
and what constraint would he not have himself endured to restore her
to liberty. He had no sooner dismissed the dwarf than a giant arrived
to present him, from Danamo, with a sabre of extraordinary beauty.
The hilt was formed by a single stone, more brilliant than a diamond,
and which emitted so dazzling a lustre that it would light the way by
night. Upon its blade were engraven these words--

 "For the hand of a conqueror."

Parcin Parcinet was pleased with this present. He went to thank the
Fairy for it, and entered her apartment, wearing the marvellous sabre
she had sent him, and the beautiful scarf he had received from Azire.
The assurance of Irolite's affection for him had relieved him from all
anxiety, and filled his bosom with that gentle and perfect happiness
which is born of mutual love. An air of joy was apparent in all his
actions. Azire attributed it to the effect of her own charms, and the
Fairy to satisfied ambition. The day passed in entertainments which
could not diminish the insupportable length of it to Parcin Parcinet.
In the evening they walked in the Palace gardens, and were rowed on
that very river with which the Prince was so well acquainted. His heart
beat quickly as he stepped into that little boat. What a difference
between the pleasure to which it was accustomed to bear him, and the
dreary dulness of his present position. Parcin Parcinet could not help
casting frequent glances towards the dwelling of the charming Irolite.
She did not make her appearance upon the terrace of the Château,
for there was an express order that she was not to be permitted to
leave her chamber, whenever the Fairy or Azire was on the water. The
latter, who narrowly watched all the Prince's actions, observed that
he often looked in that direction. "What are you gazing at, Prince?"
said she. "Amidst all the honours that surround you, is the prison of
Irolite deserving so much attention?" "Yes, Madam," replied the Prince,
very imprudently, "I feel for those who have not drawn on themselves
by their own misconduct the misfortunes they endure." "You are too
compassionate," replied Azire, contemptuously; "but to relieve your
anxiety," added she, lowering her voice, "I can inform you that Irolite
will not long continue a prisoner." "And what is to become of her,
then?" hastily inquired the young Prince. "The Queen will marry her
in a few days to Prince Ormond," answered Azire. "He is, as you know,
a kinsman of ours; and, agreeable to the Queen's intentions, the day
after the nuptials he will conduct Irolite to one of his fortresses,
from whence she will never return to the Court." "How!" exclaimed
Parcin Parcinet, with extraordinary emotion; "will the Queen bestow
that beautiful Princess on so frightful a Prince, and whose vices
exceed even his ugliness? What cruelty!"--The latter word escaped his
lips despite himself: but he could no longer be false to his courage
and his heart. "Methinks it is not for you, Parcin Parcinet," retorted
Azire, haughtily, "to complain of the cruelties of Danamo."

This conversation would, no doubt, have been carried too far for the
young Prince, whose safety lay in dissimulation; when, fortunately for
Parcin Parcinet, some of the ladies in waiting on Azire approached
her, and a moment afterwards the Fairy having appeared on the bank
of the river, Azire signified her desire to rejoin her. On landing,
Parcin Parcinet pretended indisposition in order to obtain at least the
liberty of lamenting alone his new misfortunes.

The Fairy, and more particularly Azire, testified great anxiety
respecting his illness. He returned to his own apartments. There he
indulged in a thousand complaints against destiny for the ills it
threatened to inflict on the charming Irolite, abandoned himself to
all his grief and all his passion, and beginning at length to seek
consolation for sufferings so agonizing to a faithful lover, wrote
a letter full of the most moving phrases that his affection could
dictate, to one of his Aunts, who was a Fairy as well as Danamo, but
who found as much pleasure in befriending the unfortunate as Danamo did
in making them miserable. Her name was Favourable. The Prince explained
to her the cruel situation to which love and fate had reduced him,
and not being able to absent himself from the Court of Danamo without
betraying the design he had formed, he sent his faithful slave with the
letter to Favourable. When every one had retired to rest, he left his
apartment as usual, crossed the gardens alone, and stepping into the
little boat, took up one of the oars without knowing whether or not he
could manage to use it: but what cannot love teach his votaries? He
can instruct them in much more difficult matters. He enabled Parcin
Parcinet to row with as much skill and rapidity as the most expert
waterman. He entered the Château, and was much surprised to find no
one but the prudent Mana, weeping bitterly in the Princess's chamber.
"What afflicts you, Mana?" asked the Prince, eagerly; "and where is my
dear Irolite?" "Alas! my Lord," replied Mana, "she is no longer here.
A troop of the Queen's Guards, and some women, in whom she apparently
confides, removed the Princess from the Castle about three or four
hours ago."

Parcin Parcinet heard not the last of these sad words. He had sunk
insensible on the ground the instant he learned the departure of the
Princess. Mana, with great difficulty, restored him to consciousness.
He recovered from his swoon only to give way to a sudden paroxysm
of fury. He drew a small dagger from his girdle, and had pierced his
heart, if the prudent Mana, dragging back his arm as best she could,
and falling at the same time on her knees, had not exclaimed--"How,
my Lord! would you abandon Irolite? Live to save her from the wrath
of Danamo. Alas! without you, how will she find protection from the
Fairy's cruelty?" These words suspended for a moment the despair of
the wretched Prince. "Alas!" replied he, shedding tears, which all
his courage could not restrain, "whither have they borne my Princess?
Yes, Mana! I will live to enjoy at least the sad satisfaction of dying
in her defence, and in avenging her on her enemies!" After these
words, Mana conjured him to quit the fatal building to avoid fresh
misfortunes. "Hasten, Prince," said she to him; "how know we that the
Fairy has not here some spy ready to acquaint her with everything that
passes within these walls? Be careful of a life so dear to the Princess
whom you adore. I will let you know all that I can contrive to learn
respecting her."

The Prince departed after this promise, and regained his chamber,
oppressed with all the grief which so tender and so luckless a passion
could inspire. He passed the night on a couch on which he had thrown
himself on entering the room. Daybreak surprised him there: and the
morning was advanced some hours, when he heard a noise at his chamber
door. He ran to it with the eager impatience which we feel when we
await tidings in which the heart is deeply interested. He found
his people conducting to him, a man who desired to speak with him
instantly. He recognised the messenger as one of Mana's relations, who
placed in the hand of Parcin Parcinet a letter which he took with him
into his cabinet to read, in order to conceal the emotion its receipt
excited in him. He opened it hastily, having observed it was in Mana's
handwriting, and found these words:--

"Mana, to the greatest Prince in the world. Be comforted, my Lord;
our Princess is in safety, if such an expression be allowable, so
long as she is subjected to the power of her enemy. She requested
Danamo to permit my attendance on her, and the Fairy consented that I
should rejoin her. She is confined in the Palace. Yesterday evening
the Queen caused her to be brought into her cabinet, ordered her to
look upon Prince Ormond as one who would be in a few days her husband,
and presented to her that Prince so unworthy of being your rival. The
Princess was so distressed that she could answer the Queen only by
tears. They have not yet ceased to flow. It is for you, my Lord, to
find, if possible, some means of escape from the impending calamity."

At the foot of the letter were the following lines, written with a
trembling hand, and some of the words being nearly effaced. "How I pity
you, my dear Prince; your sufferings are more terrible to me than my
own. I spare your feelings the recital of what I have endured since
yesterday. Why was I born to disturb your peace? Alas! had you never
known me, perhaps you might have been happy."

What mingled emotions of joy and grief agitated the heart of the young
Prince in reading this postscript. What kisses did he not imprint
on this precious token of the love of the divine Irolite! He was so
excited that it was with the greatest difficulty in the world that he
succeeded in writing a coherent answer. He thanked the prudent Mana;
he informed the Princess of the assistance he expected from the Fairy
Favourable; and what did he not say to her of his grief or his love!
He then took the letter to Mana's kinsman, and presented him with a
clasp set with jewels of inestimable beauty and value, as an earnest of
the reward he had deserved, for the pleasure he had given him. Mana's
kinsman had scarcely departed, when the Queen and Princess Azire sent
to enquire how the Prince had passed the night. It was easily seen by
his countenance that he was not well. He was entreated to return to his
bed, and as he felt he should be under less restraint there than in the
company of the Fairy, he consented to do so.

After dinner, the Queen came to see him, and spoke to him of the
marriage of Irolite and Prince Ormond as of a matter she had decided
upon. Parcin Parcinet, who had at length made up his mind to control
himself, so as not to awaken suspicions which might frustrate his
designs, pretended to approve of the Fairy's intentions, and only
requested her to await his perfect recovery, as it was his wish to be
present at the festivities which would take place on the occasion of
these grand nuptials. The Fairy and Azire, who were in despair about
his illness, promised him everything he desired; and Parcin Parcinet
thus retarded, for some days at least, the threatened marriage of
Irolite. His conversation with Azire, when on the water with her, had
hastened the approach of that misfortune to the beautiful Princess he
loved so tenderly. Azire had related to the Queen the words of Parcin
Parcinet, and the pity he had expressed for Irolite. The Queen, who
never paused in the execution of what she had determined on, sent that
very evening for Irolite, and decided, in conjunction with Azire, that
the marriage of the former should immediately take place, and that her
departure should be expedited before Parcin Parcinet was established in
the higher authority his match with Azire would invest him with. Before
ten days had expired, however, the Prince's faithful slave returned
from his mission. With what delight did the Prince discover in the
letter Favourable had written to him, the proofs of her compassion and
of her friendship for him and for Irolite. She sent him a ring made of
four separate metals, gold, silver, brass, and iron. This ring had the
power to save him four times from the persecution of the cruel Danamo,
and Favourable assured the Prince that the Fairy would not order him
to be pursued more often than that ring was able to protect him. These
good tidings restored the Prince to health, and he sent with all
speed for Mana's kinsman. He entrusted him with a letter for Irolite,
informing her of the success they might hope for. There was no time to
be lost. The Queen had determined the wedding of Irolite should take
place in three days. That evening there was to be a ball given by the
Princess Azire. Irolite was to be present. Parcin Parcinet could not
endure the idea of appearing "_en négligé_," as his recent illness
might have permitted him, he dressed himself in the most magnificent
style, and looked more brilliant than the sun. He dared not at first
speak to the fair Irolite; but what did not their eyes discourse when
occasionally, they ventured to glance at each other. Irolite was in the
most beautiful costume in the world. The Fairy had presented her with
some marvellous jewels, and as she had only four days to remain in the
palace, Danamo had resolved, during that short period, to treat her
with all due honour. Her beauty, which had hitherto been unadorned, in
such splendour, appeared wonderful to the whole court, and, above all,
to the enamoured Parcin Parcinet. He even imagined he could read in
some joyous flashes of her bright eyes an acknowledgment that she had
received his letter. Prince Ormond addressed Irolite frequently; but
he was so ill-looking, notwithstanding the gold and jewels with which
he was burthened, that he was not a rival worth the jealousy of the
young Prince. The ball was nearly over, when Parcin Parcinet, carried
away by his love, wished with intense ardour for an opportunity to
speak for one moment to his Princess. "Cruel Queen, and thou, also,
hateful Azire!" he mentally exclaimed; "will ye still longer deprive
me of the delightful pleasure of repeating a thousand times to the
beautiful Irolite that I adore her! Jealous witnesses of my happiness,
why do ye not quit this spot? Love can only triumph in your absence."
Scarcely had Parcin Parcinet formed this wish, than the Fairy, feeling
rather faint, called to Azire, and passed with her into an adjoining
apartment, followed by Ormond. Parcin Parcinet had on his finger the
ring which the fairy Favourable had sent him, and which had the power
to rescue him four times from the persecutions of Danamo. He should
have reserved such certain help for the most pressing necessity; but
when did violent love obey the dictates of prudence?

The young Prince was convinced by the sudden departure of the Fairy and
Azire, that the ring had begun to favour his love. He flew to the fair
Irolite. He spoke to her of his affection in terms more ardent than
eloquent. He felt that he had perhaps invoked the spell of Favourable
too thoughtlessly; but could he regret an imprudence which obtained
for him the sweet gratification of speaking to his dear Irolite?
They agreed as to the place and hour at which, the next day, they
would meet, to fly from their painful bondage. The Fairy and Azire,
after some time, returned to the ball-room. Parcin Parcinet separated
with regret from Irolite. He looked at the fatal ring, and perceived
that the iron had mixed with the other metals, and was no longer
distinguishable, he therefore saw too clearly that he had only three
more wishes to make. He resolved to render them more truly serviceable
to the Princess than the first had been. He confided the secret of his
flight to no one but his faithful slave, and passed the rest of the
night in making all the necessary preparations. The next morning he
calmly presented himself to the Queen, and appeared even in better
spirits than usual. He jested with Prince Ormond on his marriage, and
conducted himself in such a manner as to lull all suspicions, had any
existed as to his intentions. Two hours after midnight he repaired to
the Fairy's Park; he found there his faithful slave, who, in obedience
to his master's orders, had brought thither four of his horses. The
Prince was not kept long waiting. The lovely Irolite appeared, walking
with faltering steps, and leaning upon Mana. The young Princess felt
some pain in taking this course. It had needed all the cruelties of
Danamo, and all the bad qualities of Ormond, to induce her to do so.
Love alone had not sufficed to persuade her.

It was autumn. The night was beautiful, and the moon, with a host of
brilliant stars, illuminated the sky, shedding around a more charming
light than that of day. The Prince eagerly advanced to meet his
beloved, there was no time for long speeches, Parcin Parcinet tenderly
kissed the hand of Irolite and assisted her to mount her horse.
Fortunately she rode admirably. It was one of the amusements she had
taken pleasure in during her captivity. She had frequently ridden with
her attendants in a little wood close to the Château she resided in,
and of which the Fairy allowed her the range. Parcin Parcinet, after
the interchange of a few words with the Princess, mounted his own
horse. The other two were for Mana and the faithful slave. The Prince
then drawing the brilliant sabre he had received from the Fairy, swore
on it to adore the beautiful Irolite as long as he should live, and to
die, if it were necessary, in defending her from her enemies. They then
set out, and it seemed as if the Zephyrs were in league with them, or
that they mistook Irolite for Flora, for they accompanied them in their
flight.

Morning disclosed to Danamo the unexpected event. The ladies in
attendance on Irolite were surprised that she slept so much later than
usual; but, in obedience to the orders the prudent Mana had given them
over-night, they did not venture to enter the Princess's apartment
without being summoned by her. Mana slept in Irolite's chamber, and
they had quitted it by a small door that opened into a court-yard of
the Palace that was very little frequented. This door was in Irolite's
cabinet. It had been fastened up, but, with a little trouble, in two or
three evenings, they had found means to open it. The Queen at length
sent orders for Irolite to come to her. The Fairy's commands were not
to be disobeyed by any one. They accordingly knocked at the chamber
door of the Princess. They received no answer. Prince Ormond arrived.
He came to conduct Irolite to the Queen, and was much surprised to find
them knocking loudly at the door. He caused it to be broken open. They
entered, and finding the little door of the cabinet had been forced,
no longer doubted that the Princess had fled the Palace. They bore
these tidings to the Queen, who trembled with rage at hearing them. She
ordered a search to be made everywhere for Irolite, but in vain did
they endeavour to obtain a clue to her evasion, no one knew anything
about it. Prince Ormond himself set out in pursuit of Irolite. The
Fairy's Guards were despatched in all haste, and in every direction it
was thought possible she might have taken. It was observed, however, by
Azire, that amidst this general agitation, Parcin Parcinet had not made
his appearance. She sent an urgent message to him, and jealousy opening
her eyes, she felt certain that the Prince had carried off Irolite,
although she had not until that moment suspected he was in love with
her. The Fairy could not believe it; but she hastened to consult her
books, and discovered that Azire's suspicion was but too well founded.

In the meanwhile that Princess having learned that Parcin Parcinet was
not in his apartments, and could not be found anywhere in the Palace,
sent some one to the Château in which Irolite had so long resided, to
see if they could find any evidence that would convict or acquit the
Prince. The prudent Mana had taken care to leave nothing in it that
could betray the understanding that had existed between Irolite and
Parcin Parcinet; but they found near the seat on which the Prince had
lain so long insensible, the scarf Azire had given to him. It had been
unfastened during his swoon, and the Prince and Mana, absorbed in their
grief, had neither of them subsequently observed it. What were the
feelings of the haughty Azire at the sight of this scarf? Her love and
her pride were equally wounded. She was exasperated beyond measure.
She flung into the Fairy's prisons all who had been in the service of
Irolite or of the Prince. Parcin Parcinet's ingratitude to the Queen
also goaded her naturally furious temper into madness, and she would
have willingly parted with one of her kingdoms to be revenged on the
two lovers.

  [Illustration: Perfect Love.--P. 63.]

Meanwhile the fugitives were hotly pursued: Ormond and his troop found
everywhere fresh horses in readiness for them by the Fairy's orders.
Those of Parcin Parcinet were fatigued, and their speed no longer
answered to the impatience of their master. As they issued from a
forest, Ormond appeared in sight. The first impulse of the young Prince
was to attack his unworthy rival. He was spurring towards him with his
hand on the hilt of his sword, when Irolite exclaimed, "Prince! Rush
not into useless danger! Obey the orders of Favourable!" These words
calmed the anger of Parcin Parcinet, and in obedience to his Princess,
and to the Fairy, he wished that the beautiful Irolite was safe from
the persecution of the cruel Queen. He had scarcely formed the wish,
when the earth opened between him and Ormond, and presented to his
sight a little misshapen man in a very magnificent dress, who made a
sign to him to follow him. The descent was easy on his side, he rode
down it accompanied by the fair Irolite. Mana and the faithful slave
followed them, and the earth reclosed above them. Ormond, astonished at
so extraordinary an event, returned with all speed to inform Danamo.

Meanwhile our young lovers followed the little man down a very dark
road, at the end of which they found a vast Palace, lighted only by a
great quantity of lamps and flambeaux. They were desired to dismount,
and entered a Hall of prodigious magnitude. The roof was supported by
columns of shining earth covered with golden ornaments. The walls were
of the same material. A little man all covered with jewels was seated
at the end of the Hall on a golden throne surrounded by a great number
of persons as misshapen as the one who had conducted the Prince to that
spot. As soon as the latter appeared leading the charming Irolite, the
little man rose from his throne and said, "Approach, Prince. The great
Fairy Favourable, who has long been a friend of mine, has requested
me to save you from the cruelties of Danamo. I am the King of the
Gnomes. You and the fair Princess who accompanies you are welcome
to my Palace." Parcin Parcinet thanked him for the succour he had
afforded them. The King and all his subjects were enchanted with the
beauty of Irolite. They looked upon her as a star that had descended
to illuminate their abode. A magnificent banquet was served up to the
Prince and Princess. The King of the Gnomes did the honours. Music
of a very melodious, though somewhat barbaric, character, formed the
entertainment of the evening. They sang the charms of Irolite, and the
following verses were frequently repeated:--

    What lovely star hath left its sphere
    This subterranean realm to cheer?
    Beware! for in its dazzling light
    Is more than danger to the sight.
    The while its lustre we admire
    It sets the gazer's heart on fire.

After the concert the Prince and Princess were each conducted to
magnificent apartments. Mana and the faithful slave attended on them.
The next morning they were shown all over the King's Palace. He was
master of all the treasures contained in the bosom of the earth. It
was impossible to add to his riches. They presented a confused mass
of beautiful things; but art was wanting everywhere. The Prince and
Princess remained for a week in this subterranean region. Such was
the order of Favourable to the King of the Gnomes. During this time
entertainments were made for the Princess and her lover, which, though
not very tasteful, were exceedingly magnificent. The eve of their
departure, the King, to commemorate their sojourn in his empire,
caused statues of them to be erected, one on each side of his throne.
They were of gold, and the pedestals of white marble. The following
inscription, formed with diamonds, was upon the pedestal of the
Prince's statue:--

    "We desire no longer to behold the sun,--
            We have seen this Prince;
    He is more beautiful and more brilliant."

And on that of the Princess were these words, formed in a similar
manner:--

        "To the immortal glory
        Of the Goddess of Beauty.
        She descended to this spot
    Under the form and name of Irolite."

The ninth day they presented the Prince with the most beautiful horses
in the world. Their harness was of gold entirely covered with diamonds.
He quitted the gloomy abode of the Gnomes with his little troop, after
having expressed his gratitude to the King. He found himself again on
the very spot where Ormond had confronted him. He looked at his ring,
and perceived that only the silver and brazen portions of it were
discernible. He resumed his journey with the charming Irolite, and made
all speed to reach the abode of Favourable, where at length they might
feel themselves in safety, when all on a sudden, as they emerged from
a valley, they encountered a troop of Danamo's guards, who had not
given up the pursuit. The soldiers prepared to rush upon them, when the
Prince wished, and instantly a large piece of water appeared between
the party of Parcin Parcinet and that of the Fairy. A beautiful nymph,
half naked, in a little boat made of interwoven rushes, was seen in
the middle of it. She approached the shore, and requested the Prince
and Princess to enter the boat. Mana and the slave followed them. The
horses remained in the plain, and the little boat suddenly sinking,
the Fairy's Guards believed that the fugitives had perished in their
attempt to escape. But at the same moment they found themselves in
a Palace, the walls of which were only great sheets of water, which
incessantly falling with perfect regularity, formed halls, apartments,
cabinets, and surrounded gardens, in which a thousand fountains of
the most extraordinary shapes marked out the lines of the parterres.
Only the Naiades, in whose empire they were, could inhabit this
Palace, as beautiful as it was singular. To offer, therefore, a more
substantial dwelling to the Prince and the fair Irolite, the Naiade
who was their conductor led them into some grottoes of shell-work,
where coral, pearls, and all the treasures of the deep, were seen in
dazzling profusion. The beds were of moss. An hundred dolphins guarded
the grotto of Irolite, and twenty whales that of Parcin Parcinet.
The Naiades admired the beauty of the Princess, and more than one
Triton was jealous of the looks and attentions which were bestowed
on the young Prince. They served up in the grotto of the Princess a
superb collation composed of all sorts of iced fruits. Twelve Syrens
endeavoured with their sweet and charming songs to calm the anxiety of
the young Prince and the fair Irolite. The concert finished with these
verses:--

    Wherever with Love for our leader we stray,
    To render us happy he knows the sweet way.
    Rejoice, Perfect Lovers, who here, in his name
    The floods may defy to extinguish your flame.

In the evening there was a banquet, at which nothing was served but
fish, but of most extraordinary size and exquisite flavour. After
the banquet the Naiades danced a ballet in dresses of fish-scales of
various colours, which had the most beautiful effect in the world. The
horns of Tritons, and other instruments unknown to mortals, performed
the music, which, though strange, was novel and very agreeable.

Parcin Parcinet and the beautiful Irolite remained four days in this
empire. Such were the commands of Favourable. The fifth day the
Naiades assembled in crowds to escort the Prince and Princess. The two
lovers were placed in a little boat made of a single shell, and the
Naiades, half out of the water, accompanied them as far as the border
of a river, where Parcin Parcinet found his horses waiting for him,
and recommenced his journey with the more haste, as he perceived, on
examining his ring, that the silver had disappeared, and that nothing
remained but the brass; they were, however, but a short distance
from the wished-for dwelling of the Fairy Favourable. They travelled
unmolested for three more days; but on the fourth morning they saw
weapons glitter in the distance in the rays of the rising sun, and as
those who bore them advanced, they recognised Prince Ormond and his
band. Danamo had sent them back in pursuit with orders not to leave
them when seen again, nor to quit the spot where anything extraordinary
might occur to them, and, above all things, to endeavour to engage
Parcin Parcinet in single combat. Danamo had correctly imagined, from
the account of Ormond, that a Fairy protected the Prince and Princess;
but her science was so great, that she did not despair of conquering,
by spells more potent than her antagonist could cast around them.
Ormond, delighted at beholding again the Prince and Irolite, whom he
had sought with so much toil and anxiety, galloped, sword in hand, to
encounter Parcin Parcinet, according to the commands of the Fairy.
The young Prince also drew his sabre with so fierce an air, that
Ormond more than once felt inclined to waver in his course; but Parcin
Parcinet, observing Irolite bathed in tears, touched at the sight,
formed his fourth wish, and instantly a great fire rising almost to the
clouds, separated him from his enemy. This fire made Ormond and his
troop fall back, while the young Prince and Irolite, closely followed
by the faithful slave and the prudent Mana, found themselves in a
Palace, the first sight of which greatly alarmed the fair Irolite.

It was entirely of flame; but her alarm subsided as she perceived that
she felt no more heat than from the rays of the sun, and that this
flame had only the brilliancy and blaze of fire, without its more
insupportable qualities. Crowds of young and beautiful personages,
in dresses over which light flames appeared to wanton, presented
themselves to receive the Princess and her lover. One amongst them,
whom they imagined to be the Queen of those regions, by the respect
that was paid to her, accosted them, saying, "Come, charming Princess,
and you also, handsome Parcin Parcinet; you are in the Kingdom of
Salamanders. I am its Queen, and it is with pleasure I have undertaken
to conceal you for seven days in my Palace, according to the commands
of the Fairy Favourable. I would only that your stay here might be
of longer duration." After these words they were led into a large
apartment, all of flames, like the rest of the Palace, and in which a
light shone brighter than that of day. The Queen gave that evening a
grand supper, composed of every delicacy, and well served.

After the feast they repaired to a terrace, to witness a display of
fireworks of marvellous beauty and great singularity of design, which
were let off in a large court-yard of the Palace of Salamanders. Twelve
Cupids were seen upon as many columns of various coloured marbles. Six
of them appeared to be drawing their bows, and the other six bore a
large shield, on which these words were written in letters of fire:--

    Irolite, that matchless fair!
    Conqueror is everywhere.
    In vain our flaming arrows fly;
    Those that issue from her eye
    Burn more fiercely, yet are found
    Cherished in the hearts they wound.

The young Princess blushed at her own fame, and Parcin Parcinet was
enchanted that the Salamanders considered her as beautiful as she
appeared to him. Meanwhile, the Cupids shot their flaming arrows,
which, crossing each other in the air, formed in a thousand places the
initials of the lovely name of Irolite, and rose up to the Heavens.

The seven days she remained in the Palace were passed in similar
pleasures. Parcin Parcinet remarked that all the Salamanders were witty
and charmingly vivacious, very gallant and affectionate. The Queen
herself appeared not to be exempt from the influence of the tender
passion, but to be enamoured of a young Salamander of wonderful beauty.

The eighth day they quitted with regret a retreat so congenial to their
feelings. They found themselves in a lovely country. Parcin Parcinet
looked at his ring, and discovered engraved upon the metals, which were
now all four mixed together, the following words:--

 "You have wished too soon."

These words sadly afflicted the Prince and Princess, but they were now
so near the abode of the Fairy Favourable, that they were in hopes of
arriving there before evening. This reflection consoled them, and they
proceeded, invoking Fortune and Love; but, alas! they are frequently
treacherous conductors. Parcin Parcinet was, in short, on the point of
entering the dominions of the Fairy Favourable; but Ormond, obeying
the commands of Danamo, had not retired far from the spot where the
fire had risen between him and his rival. He had encamped, with his
party, behind a wood, and his sentinels, who kept incessant watch,
brought him word that the Prince and Princess had re-appeared in the
plain. He ordered his men to mount, and about sunset encountered the
unfortunate Prince and the divine Irolite. Parcin Parcinet was not
dismayed at the numbers that fell upon him altogether. He charged them
with a courage that daunted them. "I fulfil my promise, beautiful
Irolite," he exclaimed, as he drew his sabre; "I will die for you or
deliver you from your enemies!" With these words he made a blow at the
foremost, and felled him to the earth. But oh, unexpected misfortune!
the wonderful sabre, which was the gift of the Fairy Danamo, flew into
a thousand pieces. She had foreseen this result of the combat. Whenever
she made a present of weapons, she charmed them in so peculiar a
manner, that the instant they were employed against her, the first blow
shivered them to pieces.

Parcin Parcinet, then disarmed, could not make any prolonged
resistance. He was overwhelmed by numbers, taken, laden with chains,
and the young Irolite shared his fate. "Ah, Fairy Favourable,"
mournfully ejaculated the Prince, "abandon me to all the severity of
Danamo, but save the fair Irolite!" "You have disobeyed the Fairy,"
replied a youth of surprising beauty, who appeared in the air. "You
must suffer the penalty. Had you not been so prodigal of her favour,
we should to-day have saved you for ever from the cruelties of
Danamo. All the Empire of the Sylphs laments being deprived of the
glory of securing happiness to so charming a Prince and so beautiful
a Princess." So saying, he vanished, and Parcin Parcinet groaned at
the recollection of his imprudence: he seemed insensible to his own
misfortunes, but how deeply did he feel those of Irolite! His remorse
at having been the cause of them would have destroyed him, had not
Destiny resolved that he should live to suffer still more cruel agony.

The young Irolite displayed a courage worthy of the illustrious race
from which she had descended, and the pitiless Ormond, far from being
affected at so touching a spectacle, strove to aggravate the misery he
occasioned them. He had the prisoners separated, and so deprived them
of the melancholy pleasure of mingling their tears over their departed
hopes. Their wretched journey ended, they were taken to the palace of
the wicked Fairy. She felt a malignant joy at seeing the young Prince
and Princess in a state that would have awakened pity in the heart of
any other creature. Even Azire commiserated Parcin Parcinet, but did
not dare to evince it before the Fairy. "I shall at length, then," said
the cruel Queen, addressing herself to the Prince, "have the pleasure
of revenging myself for thy ingratitude. Go! In lieu of ascending
the throne my favour had destined thee, enter the prison on the sea,
in which thou shalt end thy wretched life in frightful tortures." "I
prefer the most horrible dungeon," replied the Prince, looking proudly
at her, "to the favours of so unjust a Queen as thou art!" These words
increased the irritation of the Fairy. She had expected to see him
humble himself at her feet. She sent him instantly to the prison she
had fixed upon. Irolite wept as he was dragged away; Azire could not
suppress her sighs, and all the Court mourned in secret the merciless
sentence. As for the beautiful Irolite, the Queen had her removed to
the Château in which she had previously so long resided, placed a
strict guard upon her, and treated her with all the inhumanity of which
she was capable.

The prison to which they conveyed the Prince was a frightful tower
in the midst of the sea, built on a little desert island. They shut
him up in it, laden with irons, and treated him with all the severity
imaginable. What an abode for a Prince worthy to reign over the
universe! To think of Irolite was his sole occupation. He invoked the
help of the Fairy Favourable for his dear Princess alone, and wished
a thousand times a day, to expiate by death the only injury he had
done her. His faithful slave had been consigned to the same prison,
but he had not the satisfaction of serving his illustrious master, and
Parcin Parcinet had about him none but fierce soldiers, devoted to the
Fairy, who nevertheless, while obeying her orders, respected, despite
themselves, the unfortunate captive. His youth, his beauty, and, above
all, his courage, excited in them an admiration which compelled them
to regard him as a man very superior to all others. The prudent Mana
had been dragged to the Château in which they had immured Irolite,
as the Prince's faithful slave had been to the prison on the sea.
Danamo's women alone approached the Princess, and by the Fairy's orders
overwhelmed her every moment with new misery, by their accounts of the
sufferings of Parcin Parcinet. The distresses of her lover made Irolite
forget her own, and everything renewed her tears in that spot where she
had so often heard that charming Prince swear to her eternal fidelity.
"Alas!" she murmured to herself, "why have you been so faithful, my
dear Prince? Your inconstancy would have killed me; but what of that,
you would have lived, and been happy!"

After three months' suffering, Danamo, who had employed that period
in the preparation of a spell of extraordinary power, sent to Irolite
one morning a couple of lamps, one of gold, the other of crystal,
commanding her to keep one of the two always burning, but leaving her
to choose which she would light. Irolite, with her natural docility,
sent word that she would obey the Fairy's orders, without even seeking
to comprehend their object.

She carried the two lamps carefully to a cabinet. The golden one was
lighted when she received it, and therefore she allowed it to burn
throughout that day and night, and the next morning she lighted the
other. In this manner she continued to obey the Fairy, lighting the
lamps alternately for fifteen days, when her health became seriously
affected. She attributed her failing strength to her sorrow, and,
to increase her grief, they informed her that Parcin Parcinet was
exceedingly ill. What tidings for Irolite! Her deep distress, her utter
prostration, affected all her attendants. One evening, when the rest
were asleep, one of them softly approached the Princess, and seeing her
about to light the crystal lamp, said to her, "Extinguish that fatal
light, your existence depends upon it. Save the life of one so lovely
from the cruel designs of Danamo." "Alas!" feebly replied the wretched
Irolite, "she has rendered my life so miserable, that it is but kind
of the Fairy to afford me such means of ending it; but," added she,
with an emotion which brought back the colour to her pale cheeks, "what
life depends upon the golden lamp, which I have been equally careful to
light in its turn?" "That of Parcin Parcinet," answered the confidante
of Danamo, for the woman was but obeying her orders in thus speaking to
the Princess. The wicked Fairy wished to torment her by this revelation
of the cruel task she had imposed upon her. At this intelligence her
agony at having unconsciously hastened the termination of her lover's
existence, deprived her for some considerable time of her senses. On
recovering them, she at the same time returned to her despair. "Hateful
Fairy!" she exclaimed, as soon as she had power to speak, "Barbarous
Fairy! will not my death satisfy thy vengeance? Wouldst thou condemn
me, inhuman, to destroy with my own hand a Prince so dear to me, and so
worthy of the most perfect and tender affection? But death, a thousand
times more merciful than thou art, will soon deliver me from all the
tortures which thy wrath hath invented, to rack such fond and faithful
hearts."

The young Princess wept incessantly over the fatal lamp, on which
depended the life of Parcin Parcinet, and from that moment only lighted
the one that wasted her own. That she saw burn with joy, regarding it
as a sacrifice to love, and to her lover. In the meanwhile the wretched
Prince was a prey to tortures, which surpassed even his powers of
endurance. By command of the Fairy, one of his guards, feigning to
pity the misfortunes of the illustrious prisoner, informed him that
Irolite had consented to marry Prince Ormond, a few days after he
(Parcin Parcinet) had been consigned to the frightful dungeon in which
he still languished. That the Princess had appeared quite happy since
her marriage, that she had been present at all the entertainments given
in celebration of it, and had finally quitted the country with her
husband. This was the only misfortune the Prince had not anticipated,
and it was also the only one too heavy for him to bear. "What!" he
exclaimed, despairingly, "Thou art faithless to me, dear Irolite! Thou
art the bride of Ormond! Thou hast not even pitied my misfortunes. Thou
hast but thought how to end those my love brought upon thyself. Live
happy, ungrateful Irolite! Inconstant as thou art, I still adore thee,
and desire but to die for love, as thou wouldst not I should have the
glory of dying for thee!"

Whilst Parcin Parcinet was plunged in this affliction, and the tender
Irolite wasted her own life to prolong that of her lover, Danamo was
moved by the despair of Azire, who was dying with sorrow for the
sufferings of Parcin Parcinet. The cruel Fairy perceived at length
that, to save the life of her child, it was necessary to pardon the
Prince, to permit Azire to visit him, and to promise him all the
benefits that had previously awaited him, provided he consented to
marry her, and the Fairy determined to put Irolite to death, the moment
the Prince had accepted that offer.

The hope of again beholding Parcin Parcinet restored Azire to life,
and the Fairy allowed her to send to Irolite's Château for the golden
lamp, which she desired to keep in her own custody, that she might be
certain it was not lighted. This mandate seemed more cruel than all
the others to the afflicted Irolite. What anxiety did she not endure
respecting the fate of Parcin Parcinet. "Do not distress yourself so
much about the Prince," said the women in attendance upon her, "he is
going to marry the Princess Azire, and it is she who, interested in the
preservation of his life, has sent for the lamp on which it depends."

The torments of jealousy had as yet been wanting, to complete the
misery of the unfortunate Irolite. At these words she felt them waking
in her heart. In the meanwhile Azire had visited the Prince, and
offered him her hand and her kingdoms; then, pretending to be ignorant
that he had been told that Irolite had married Ormond, she endeavoured
to convince him by citing this example, that he had been more than
sufficiently constant. Parcin Parcinet, to whom nothing was valuable
without the charming Irolite, preferred his prison and his sufferings
to liberty and sovereignty. Azire was distracted at his refusal, and
her affliction rendered her almost as unhappy as he was.

During this time the Fairy Favourable, who had hitherto boasted of
her insensibility to love, had found it impossible to resist the
attractions of a young Prince residing at her Court. He had conceived
a passion for her. The Fairy had considerable difficulty in bringing
herself to let him know that his attentions had conquered her pride.
At length, however, she yielded to the desire of acquainting him with
his triumph. The pleasure of conversing with those we love appeared to
her then so charming and so desirable, that, excusing the fault she had
so severely punished, she repaired, in all haste, to the assistance of
Parcin Parcinet and the beautiful Irolite.

A little later, and her aid would have been useless. The fatal lamp
of Irolite had but six days longer to burn, and the grief of Parcin
Parcinet was rapidly terminating his existence, when the Fairy
Favourable arrived at the Palace of Danamo. She was by far the most
powerful, and made herself obeyed despite the anger of the wicked
Fairy. The Prince was released from prison; but he would not quit it
until he was assured by Favourable that the fair Irolite might still
be his bride. He appeared, notwithstanding his pallor, more beautiful
than the day, the light of which he was once more permitted to behold.
He repaired, with the Fairy Favourable, to the Château of his Princess.
Her lamp emitted but a feeble light, and the dying Irolite would not
allow them to extinguish it until she had been assured of the fidelity
of her now happy lover. There are no words capable of expressing the
perfect joy experienced by the fond pair at this meeting. The Fairy
Favourable restored them in an instant to all their former health and
beauty, and endowed them with long life and constant felicity. Their
affection she found it impossible to increase. Danamo, furious at
beholding her authority thus overthrown, perished by her own hand. The
fate of Azire and of Ormond was left by the Prince to the decision of
Irolite. The only vengeance she took upon them was uniting them in
marriage, and Parcin Parcinet, as generous as he was constant, would
only receive his father's kingdom, leaving Azire to reign over those of
Danamo.

The nuptials of the Prince and the divine Irolite were celebrated
with infinite magnificence, and after duly expressing their gratitude
to the Fairy Favourable, and heaping rewards on the slave and the
prudent Mana, they departed for their kingdom, where the Prince and the
charming Irolite enjoyed the rare happiness of loving as fondly and
truly in prosperity as they had done in adversity.




ANGUILLETTE.


To whatever greatness Destiny may elevate those it favours, there is no
worldly felicity exempt from serious sorrow. One cannot be acquainted
with Fairies, and be ignorant that the most skilful amongst them have
failed to discover a charm which would secure them from the misfortune
of being compelled to change their shape some few days in every month,
for that of some animal, terrestrial, celestial, or aquatic.

During that dangerous period, when they are completely at the mercy of
mankind, they have frequently great difficulty in saving themselves
from the perils to which that stern necessity exposes them.

One amongst them, who had changed herself into an Eel, was
unfortunately taken by fishermen, and flung immediately into a small
square tank in the midst of a beautiful meadow, wherein they kept
the fish that were daily required for the table of the King of that
country. Anguillette (so was the Fairy named) found in her new abode a
great many fine fish destined, like herself, to live but a few hours.
She had heard the fishermen say to one another, that that very evening
the King purposed to give a grand banquet, for the which these fine
fish had been carefully selected.

What tidings for the unfortunate Fairy! She accused the Fates of
cruelty a thousand times! She sighed most sadly; but after hiding
herself for some time at the very bottom of the water, in order to
bewail her misfortune in solitude, the desire to escape if possible
from so urgent a peril, induced her to look about her in every
direction to see if she could not by some means get out of the
reservoir, and regain the river which ran at no great distance from
that spot. But the Fairy looked in vain. The tank was too deep for her
to hope to get out of it without help, and her distress was augmented
by seeing the fishermen who had taken her again approaching. They
began to throw in their nets, and Anguillette, by avoiding them with
great cunning, retarded for a few moments the death that awaited her.
The youngest of the King's daughters was walking at that time in the
meadow. She approached the tank to amuse herself by seeing the men fish.

The sun, about to set, shone brilliantly on the water. The skin of
Anguillette, which was very glossy, glittered in its rays as if partly
gilt and of all the colours of the rainbow. The young Princess caught
sight of her, and thinking her exceedingly beautiful, ordered the
fishermen to try and catch that Eel for her. They obeyed, and the
unfortunate Fairy was speedily placed in the hands of the person who
would decide her fate.

When the Princess had contemplated Anguillette for a few moments, she
was touched with compassion, and running to the riverside, put her
gently into the water. This unexpected service filled the Fairy's heart
with gratitude. She appeared on the surface, and said to the Princess,
"I owe you my life, generous Plousine (such was her name), but it is
most fortunate for you that I do so. Be not afraid," she continued,
observing the young Princess about to run away. "I am a Fairy, and will
prove the truth of my words by heaping an infinite number of favours
upon you."

As people were accustomed in those days to behold Fairies, Plousine
recovered from her first alarm, and listened with great attention to
the agreeable promises of Anguillette. She even began to answer her;
but the Fairy interrupting her, said, "Wait till you have profited by
my favour before you express your acknowledgments. Go, young Princess,
and return to this spot to-morrow morning. Think, in the meantime, what
you would wish for, and whatever it may be I will grant it. You may, at
your choice, possess the most perfect and bewitching beauty, the finest
and most charming intellect, or incalculable riches." After these
words, Anguillette sank to the bottom of the river, and left Plousine
highly gratified with her adventure.

She determined not to tell any one what had befallen her, "For," said
she, to herself, "if Anguillette should deceive me, my sisters will
believe that I invented this story."

After this little reflection, she hastened to rejoin her suite, which
was composed of only a few ladies. She found them looking for her.

The young Plousine was occupied all the succeeding night in thinking
what should be her choice. Beauty almost turned the scale; but as she
had sufficient sense to desire still more, she finally determined to
request that favour of the Fairy.

She rose with the sun, and ran to the meadow under the pretence of
gathering flowers to make a garland, as she said, to present to the
Queen, her mother, at her levée. Her attendants dispersed themselves
about the meadow to cull the freshest and most beautiful of the flowers
with which it was everywhere enamelled.

Meanwhile, the young Princess hastened to the riverside, and found upon
the spot where she had seen the Fairy, a column of white marble, of
the most perfect purity. An instant afterwards, the column opened and
the Fairy emerged from it, and appeared to the Princess no longer as
a fish, but as a tall and beautiful woman, of majestic demeanour, and
whose robes and head-dress were covered with jewels.

"I am Anguillette," said she to the young Princess, who gazed upon her
with great attention; "I come to fulfil my promise. You have chosen
intellectual perfection, and you shall possess it from this very
moment. You shall have so much sense as to be envied by those who till
now have flattered themselves they were specially endowed with it."

The youthful Plousine, at these words, felt a considerable alteration
taking place in her mind. She thanked the Fairy with an eloquence that
till then she had been a stranger to.

The Fairy smiled at the astonishment the Princess could not conceal at
her own powers of expression. "I am so much pleased with you," said the
benignant Anguillette, "for making the choice you have done, in lieu
of preferring beauty of person, which has such charms for one of your
sex and age, that to reward you, I will add the gift of that loveliness
you have so prudently foregone. Return hither to-morrow, at the same
hour,--I give you till then to choose the style of beauty you would
possess."

The Fairy disappeared, and left the young Plousine still more
impressed with her good fortune. Her choice of superior intellect was
dictated by reason, but the promise of surpassing beauty flattered her
heart, and that which touches the heart is always felt most deeply.

On quitting the riverside, the Princess took the flowers presented
to her by her attendants, and made a very tasteful garland with
them, which she carried to the Queen; but what was her Majesty's
astonishment, that of the King, and of all the Court, to hear Plousine
speak with an elegance and a fluency which captivated every heart.

The Princesses, her sisters, vainly endeavoured to contest her mental
superiority; they were compelled to wonder at and admire it.

Night came. The Princess, occupied with the expectation of becoming
beautiful, instead of retiring to rest, passed into a cabinet hung with
portraits, in which, under the form of goddesses, were represented
several of the Queens and Princesses of her family. All these were
beauties, and she indulged a hope that they would assist her in
deciding on a style of beauty worthy to be solicited from a Fairy. The
first that met her sight was a Juno. She was fair and had a presence
such as should distinguish the Queen of the Gods. Pallas and Venus
stood beside her. The subject of the picture was the Judgment of Paris.

The noble haughtiness of Pallas excited the admiration of the young
Princess; but the loveliness of Venus almost decided her choice.
Nevertheless, she passed on to the next picture, in which was seen
Pomona reclining on a couch of turf, beneath trees laden with the
finest fruits in the world. She appeared so charming, that the
Princess, who since morning had become acquainted with all their
stories, was not surprised that a God had taken various forms in order
to please her.

Diana next appeared, attired as the poets represent her, the quiver
slung behind her, and the bow in her hand. She was pursuing a stag, and
followed by a numerous band of Nymphs.

Flora attracted her attention a little further off. She appeared to be
walking in a garden, the flowers of which, although exquisite, could
not be compared to the bloom of her complexion. Next came the Graces,
beautiful and enchanting. This picture was the last in the room.

But the Princess was struck by that which was over the mantel-piece.
It was the Goddess of Youth. A heavenly air was shed over her whole
person. Her tresses were the fairest in the world; the turn of her head
was most graceful, her mouth charming, her figure perfectly beautiful,
and her eyes appeared much more likely to intoxicate than the nectar
with which she seemed to be filling a cup.

"I will wish," exclaimed the young Princess, after she had contemplated
with delight this lovely portrait, "I will wish to be as beautiful as
Hebe, and to remain so as long as possible."

After this determination she returned to her bed-chamber, where the day
she awaited seemed to her impatience as if it would never dawn.

At length it came, and she hastened again to the riverside. The Fairy
kept her word. She appeared, and threw a few drops of water in the face
of Plousine, who became immediately as beautiful as she had desired to
be.

Some sea-gods had accompanied the Fairy. Their applause was the first
effect produced by the charms of the fortunate Plousine. She looked at
her image in the water, and could not recognise herself. Her silence
and her astonishment were for the moment the only indications of her
thankfulness.

"I have fulfilled all your wishes," said the generous Fairy. "You
ought to be content; but I shall not be so if my favours do not far
exceed your desires. In addition to the wit and beauty I have endowed
you with, I bestow on you all the treasures at my disposal. They are
inexhaustible. You have but to wish whenever you please for infinite
wealth, and at the same moment you will acquire it, not only for
yourself, but for all those you may deem worthy to possess it."

The Fairy disappeared, and the youthful Plousine, now as lovely as
Hebe, returned to the palace. Everybody who met her was enchanted. They
announced her arrival to the King, who was himself lost in admiration
of her, and it was only by her voice and her talent that they
recognised the amiable Princess. She informed the King that a Fairy
had bestowed all those precious gifts upon her; and she was no longer
called anything but Hebe, in consequence of her perfect resemblance to
the portrait of that Goddess. What new causes were here to engender
the hatred of her sisters against her! The beauties of her mind had
excited their jealousy much less than those of her person.

All the Princes who had been attracted by their charms became faithless
to them without the least hesitation. In like manner were all the other
Court beauties abandoned by their admirers. No tears or reproaches
could stop the flight of those inconstant lovers, and this conduct,
which then appeared so singular, has since, it is said, become a common
custom.

Hebe inflamed all hearts around her, while her own remained insensible.

Notwithstanding the hatred her sisters evinced towards her, she
neglected nothing that she thought might please them. She wished for
so much wealth for the eldest--and to wish and to give were the same
thing to her,--that the greatest Sovereign in that part of the world
requested the hand of that Princess in marriage, and the nuptials were
celebrated with incredible magnificence. The King, Hebe's father,
desired to take the field with a great army. The wishes of his
beautiful daughter caused him to succeed in all his enterprises, and
his kingdom was filled with such immense wealth, that he became the
most formidable of all the monarchs in the universe.

The divine Hebe, however, weary of the bustle of the Court, was anxious
to pass a few months in a pleasant mansion a short distance from the
capital. She had excluded from it all magnificence, but everything
about it was elegant, and of a charming simplicity. Nature alone had
taken care to embellish the walks, which Art had not been employed
to form. A wood, the paths through which had something wild in their
scenery, intersected by rivulets and little torrents that formed
natural cascades, surrounded this beautiful retreat.

The youthful Hebe often walked in this solitary wood. One day, when her
heart felt more than usually oppressed with a tedium and lassitude to
which she was now constantly subject, she endeavoured to ascertain the
reason of it. She seated herself on the turf, beside a rivulet that
with gentle murmur courted meditation.

"What sorrow is it," she asked herself, "that comes thus to trouble the
excess of my happiness? What Princess in all the universe is blest with
a lot so perfect as mine? The beneficence of the Fairy has accorded
me all I wished for. I can heap treasures upon all who surround me. I
am adored by all who behold me, and my heart is a stranger to every
painful emotion. No! I cannot imagine whence arises the insupportable
weariness which has for some time past detracted from the happiness of
my life."

The young Princess was incessantly occupied by this reflection. At
length she determined to go to the bank of Anguilette's river, and
endeavour to obtain an interview with her.

The Fairy, accustomed to indulge her inclinations, appeared on the
surface of the water. It happened to be one of the days when she was
changed into a fish.

"It always gives me pleasure to see you, young Princess," said she
to Hebe. "I know you have been passing some time in a very solitary
dwelling, and you appear to me in a languishing state, which does not
at all correspond with your good fortune. What hails you, Hebe? Confide
in me." "There is nothing the matter," replied the young Princess,
with some embarrassment. "You have showered too many benefits upon
me for anything to be wanting to a felicity which is your own work."
"You would deceive me," rejoined the Fairy; "I see it easily. You are
no longer satisfied. Yet what more can you desire? Deserve my favour
by a frank confession," added the gracious Fairy, "and I promise you
I will again fulfil your wishes." "I know not what I wish," replied
the charming Hebe. "But nevertheless," she continued, casting down
her beautiful eyes, "I feel a lack of something, and that, whatever
it may be, it is that which is absolutely essential to my happiness."
"Ah!" exclaimed the Fairy, "it is love that you are sighing for. That
passion alone could inspire you with such strange ideas. Dangerous
disposition!" continued the prudent Fairy. "You sigh for love--you
shall experience it. Hearts are but too naturally disposed to be
affected by it. But I warn you that you will vainly invoke me to
deliver you from the fatal passion you believe to be so sweet a
blessing. My power does not extend so far."

"I care not," quickly replied the Princess, smiling and blushing at
the same moment. "Alas! of what value to me are all the gifts you have
bestowed upon me, if I cannot in turn make with them the happiness of
another?" The Fairy sighed at these words, and sank to the bottom of
the river.

Hebe retraced her steps to the wilderness, her heart filled with a hope
which already began to dissipate her melancholy. The warnings of the
Fairy caused her some anxiety; but her prudent reflections were soon
banished by others, as dangerous as they were agreeable.

On reaching home she found a courier awaiting her with a message from
the King, commanding her return to the Court that very day, in order
that she might be present at an entertainment in preparation for the
succeeding one. She took her departure accordingly, a few hours after
the receipt of the message, and returned to the Court, where she was
received with great pleasure by the King and Queen; who informed her
that a foreign Prince, upon his travels, having arrived there a few
days previously, they had determined to give him a fête, that he might
talk in other countries of the magnificence displayed in their kingdom.

The youthful Hebe, obeying a presentiment of which she was unconscious,
first inquired of the Princess, her sister, if the foreigner was
handsome. "I never yet saw any one that could be compared to him,"
answered the Princess. "Describe, him to me," said Hebe, with emotion.
"He is such as they paint heroes," replied Ilerie. "His form is
graceful; his demeanour noble; his eyes are full of a fire that has
already made more than one indifferent beauty at this Court acknowledge
their power. He has the finest head in the world; his hair is dark
brown; and the moment he appears, he absorbs the attention of all
beholders."

"You draw a most charming portrait of him," said the youthful Hebe; "is
it not a little flattered?" "No, sister," replied the Princess Ilerie,
with a sigh she could not suppress. "Alas! you will find him, perhaps,
but too worthy of admiration."

The Queen retired, and the beautiful Hebe, as soon as she had time to
examine her heart, perceived that she had lost that tranquillity of
which, till now, she had not known the value.

"Anguillette!" she exclaimed, as soon as she was alone. "Alas! what is
this object which you have allowed to present itself to my sight? Your
prudent counsels are rendered vain by its presence. Why do you not
give me strength enough to resist such attractive charms? It may be,
however, that their power surpasses that of any Fairy."

Hebe slept but little that night. She rose very early, and the thought
of how she should dress herself for the fête that evening occupied her
the whole day, to a degree she had been previously a stranger to, for
it was the first time she had felt an anxiety to please.

The young foreigner, actuated by the same desire, neglected nothing
that might make him appear agreeable to the eyes of the charming
Hebe. The Princess Ilerie was equally solicitous of conquest. She
possessed a thousand attractions, and when Hebe was not beside her,
she was considered the most beautiful creature in the world; but Hebe
outshone every one. The Queen gave a magnificent ball that evening;
it was succeeded by a marvellous banquet. The young foreigner would
have been struck by its prodigious splendour, if he could have looked
at anything besides Hebe. After the banquet, a novel and brilliant
illumination shed another daylight over the palace gardens. It was
summer-time; the company descended into the gardens for the pleasure of
an evening promenade. The handsome foreigner conducted the Queen; but
this honour did not compensate him for being deprived of the company
of his Princess, even for a few moments. The trees were decorated with
festoons of flowers, and the lamps which formed the illumination were
disposed in a manner to represent, in every direction, bows, arrows,
and other weapons of Cupid, together, in some places, with inscriptions.

The company entered a little grove, illuminated like the rest of the
gardens, and the Queen seated herself beside a pleasant fountain,
around which had been arranged seats of turf, ornamented with garlands
of pinks and roses. Whilst the Queen was engaged in conversation with
the King and a host of courtiers that surrounded them, the Princesses
amused themselves by reading the sentences formed by small lamps under
the various devices. The handsome foreigner was at that moment close
to the beautiful Hebe. She turned her eyes towards a spot in which
appeared a shower of darts, and read aloud these words, which were
displayed beneath them:--

 "Some are inevitable."

"They are those which are shot from the eyes of the divine Hebe,"
quickly added the Prince, looking at her tenderly. The Princess heard
him, and felt confused; but the Prince drew from her embarrassment a
happy augury for his love, as it appeared unmingled with anger. The
fête terminated with a thousand delightful novelties. The charms of the
stranger had touched too sensibly the heart of Ilerie for her to be
long without perceiving that he loved another. The Prince had paid her
some attention previous to the arrival of Hebe at Court; but since he
had seen the latter, he had been wholly engrossed by his passion.

In the meanwhile the young stranger endeavoured, by every proof of
affection, to touch the heart of the beautiful Princess. He was
devoted, amiable--her fate compelled her to love, and the Fairy
abandoned her to the inclinations of her heart. What excuses for
yielding! She could no longer struggle against herself. The charming
Stranger had informed her that he was the son of a King, and that his
name was Atimir. This name was known to the Princess. The Prince had
performed wonders in a war between the two kingdoms; and as they had
always been opposed to each other, he had not chosen to appear at the
Court of Hebe's royal father under his real name.

The young Princess, after a conversation during which her heart fully
imbibed the sweet and dangerous poison of which the Fairy had warned
her, gave permission to Atimir to disclose to the King his rank and his
love. The young Prince was transported with delight; he flew to the
King's apartments, and urged his suit with all the eloquence his love
could inspire him with.

The King conducted him to the Queen. This proposed marriage, assuring
the establishment of a lasting peace between the two kingdoms, the
hand of the beautiful Hebe was promised to her happy lover as soon
as he had received the consent of the King, his father. The news was
soon circulated, and the Princess Ilerie suffered anguish equal to her
jealousy. She wept--she groaned; but it was necessary to control her
emotion and conceal her vain regrets.

The beautiful Hebe and Atimir now saw each other continually; their
affection increased daily, and in those happy days the young Princess
could not imagine why the Fairies did not employ all their skill to
make mortals fall in love when they wished to insure their felicity.

An ambassador from Atimir's royal father arrived at Court. He had
been awaited with the utmost impatience. He was the bearer of the
required consent, and preparations were immediately commenced for the
celebration of those grand nuptials. Atimir had therefore no longer any
reason for anxiety--a dangerous state for a lover one desires to retain
faithful.

As soon as the Prince felt certain of his happiness, he became less
ardent. One day that he was on his way to meet the fair Hebe in the
palace gardens, he heard the voices of females in conversation in
a bower of honeysuckles. He caught the sound of his name, and this
awakened his curiosity to know more. He approached the bower softly,
and easily recognised the voice of the Princess Ilerie. "I shall
die before that fatal day, my dear Cléonice," said she, to a young
person seated beside her. "The gods will not permit me to behold the
ungrateful object of my love united to the too fortunate Hebe. My
torments are too keen to endure much longer." "But, madam," replied
her female companion, "Prince Atimir is not faithless; he has never
avowed love for you. Destiny alone is to blame for your misfortunes,
and amongst all the princes who adore you, you might find, perhaps, one
more amiable than he is, did not a fatal prepossession engross your
heart." "More amiable than him!" rejoined Ilerie. "Is there such a
being in the universe? Powerful Fairy!" she added, with a sigh, "of all
the blessings with which you have laden the fortunate Hebe, I but covet
that of Atimir's devoted attachment to her." The words of the Princess
were interrupted by her tears. Ah! how happy would she have been had
she known how much those tears had moved the heart of Atimir!

She rose to leave the bower, and the Prince hid himself behind some
trees to escape observation. The tears and the love of Ilerie had
affected him deeply, but he imagined they were but the emotions of pity
which he felt for a beautiful Princess whom he had unintentionally
made so miserable. He proceeded to join Hebe, and the contemplation of
her charms banished for the moment all other thoughts from his mind.
In passing through the gardens, as he returned with the Princess Hebe
to the Palace, he trod upon something which attracted his attention.
He picked it up, and found it was a set of magnificent tablets. It was
not far from the bower in which he had overheard the conversation of
Ilerie and her attendant. He feared if Hebe saw the tablets, she would
obtain some knowledge of his adventure. He hid them, therefore, without
her having observed them. She happened at that moment to be occupied in
re-adjusting some ornament in her head-dress.

That evening Ilerie did not make her appearance in the Queen's
apartments. It was reported that she had felt indisposed on returning
from her walk. Atimir perfectly understood that her object was to
conceal the agitation to which he had seen her a prey in the bower of
honeysuckles. This reflection increased his compassion for her.

As soon as he had retired to his own chamber he opened the tablets he
had picked up. On the first leaf he saw a cipher formed of a double A,
crowned with a wreath of myrtle, and supported by two little Cupids,
one of whom appeared to be wiping the tears from his cheeks with the
end of the ribbon that bandaged his eyes, and the other breaking his
arrows. The sight of this cipher agitated the young Prince. He knew
that Ilerie drew admirably. He turned over the leaf quickly to gain
further information, and on the opposite side found the following
lines:-

    Hither all-conquering Love thy footsteps led;
    At thy first glance sweet peace my bosom fled;
    Oh, cruel one, to try on me the dart
    With which you meant to wound another's heart!

The handwriting, which he recognised, but too clearly proved to him
that the tablets were those of the Princess Ilerie. He was affected
by the great tenderness of these sentiments, which far from being
nourished by his love and attentions, were not even encouraged by hope.
These verses reminded him that previous to the arrival of Hebe at Court
he had thought Ilerie lovely. He began to consider himself unfaithful
to that Princess, and he became too seriously so to the charming Hebe.

He struggled, however, against these first emotions; but his heart was
accustomed to range, and so dangerous a habit is rarely corrected.

He threw Ilerie's tablets on a table, resolving not to look at them any
more; but he took them up again a moment afterwards, despite himself,
and found in them a thousand things which completed the triumph of
Ilerie over the divine Hebe.

The Prince's heart was occupied all night by conflicting feelings. In
the morning he waited on the King, who named the day he had fixed on
for his marriage with Hebe. Atimir replied with an embarrassment which
the King mistook for a proof of his passion--(how little do we know
of the human heart!) It was the effect of his inconstancy! The King
desired to visit the Queen; the Prince was obliged to follow him. He
had been there but a short time when the Princess Ilerie appeared with
an air of melancholy which made her more lovely in the eyes of the
inconstant Atimir, who was aware of its cause. He approached her, and
talked to her for some time. He gave her to understand that he was no
longer ignorant of her affection for him. He spoke with ardour of his
feelings for her. It was too much for Ilerie. Ah! how is it possible to
receive calmly the assurance of so great so unexpected a happiness.

The charming Hebe entered the Queen's apartments shortly afterwards.
Her sight brought the blood into the cheeks both of the Princess
Ilerie and of the fickle Atimir. "How beautiful she is!" exclaimed
Ilerie, looking at the Prince with an emotion she could not conceal.
"Avoid her, sir, or end at once my existence." The Prince had not
power to answer her. Hebe approached them with a grace and charm
which unconsciously loaded with reproaches the ungrateful Atimir. He
could not long endure his position. He quitted the Princess, saying
that he was anxious to despatch a courier to his father. She was so
prepossessed in his favour that she never noticed some eloquent glances
at Ilerie, which he cast on leaving her.

While Ilerie triumphed in secret, the beautiful Hebe learned from the
King and Queen that in three days she was to be the bride of Atimir.
How unworthy was he of the sensations which this news awakened in the
heart of the lovely Hebe.

The faithless Prince, though pre-occupied by his new passion, passed
part of the day in Hebe's company. Ilerie was present, and was a
thousand times ready to die with jealousy. Her love had redoubled since
she had entertained hope.

On returning to his own apartments in the evening, the Prince was
presented with a note by an unknown messenger. He opened it hastily,
and found in it these words:--

"I yield to a passion a thousand times stronger than my reason. Since I
can no longer attempt to conceal sentiments which chance has revealed
to you, come, Prince, come, and learn the determination to which I am
driven by the love you have inspired me with. Oh, how happy will it be
for me if it cost me but my life!"

The bearer of the note informed the Prince that he was commissioned to
conduct him to the spot where the Princess Ilerie awaited him. Atimir
did not hesitate a moment to follow him, and after several turnings,
he was introduced into a little pavilion at the end of a very dark
avenue. The interior of the pavilion was sufficiently lighted. He found
in it Ilerie with one of her attendants; the rest were walking in the
gardens. When she had retired to this apartment, no one entered it
without her orders. Ilerie was seated on a pile of cushions of crimson
and gold embroidery. Her dress was rich and elegant, the material being
of yellow and silver tissue. Her hair, which was black and exceedingly
beautiful, was ornamented with ribbons of the same colour as the dress,
and ties of yellow diamonds. At her sight, Atimir could not persuade
himself that infidelity was a crime. He knelt at her feet, and Ilerie,
gazing upon him with a tenderness sufficiently indicative of the
emotion of her heart, said, "Prince, I have not caused you to come
hither in order to persuade you to break off your marriage; I know too
well it is determined upon, and the expressions with which you have
endeavoured to alleviate my misfortune and flatter my affection do not
induce me to believe that you would abandon Hebe for me; but," she
continued, with a gush of tears, which completed the conquest of the
heart of Atimir, "I will not endure the life which you have rendered
so wretched. I will sacrifice it without regret to my love, and this
poison," she added, showing a little box which she had in her hand,
"will save me from the fearful torment of seeing you the husband of
Hebe."

"No, beautiful Ilerie!" exclaimed the fickle Prince, "I will never be
her husband. I will abandon all for your sake; I love you a thousand
times better than I loved Hebe; and despite my duty and my faith so
solemnly plighted, I am ready to fly with you to a spot where no
obstacle shall exist to our happiness." "Ah, Prince!" said Ilerie, with
a sigh, "can I confide, then, in one so faithless?" "He will never be
faithless to you," rejoined Atimir. "And the King, your father, who
gave Hebe to me, will not refuse to sanction my union with the lovely
Ilerie, when she is already mine." "Away, then, Atimir," said the
Princess, after a few minutes' silence. "Let us hasten whither our
destiny leads us. Whatever misery the step entails on me, nothing can
weigh against the sweet delights of loving and being beloved."

After these words, they consulted together respecting their flight.
There was no time to lose. They determined to depart the following
night. They separated with regret, and, notwithstanding the vows of
Atimir, Ilerie still feared the power of Hebe's attractions. The rest
of that night and all the next day she was a prey to that anxiety.

In the meanwhile, the Prince hurriedly gave all the necessary orders
for keeping his departure secret, and the next day, as soon as
everybody in the palace had retired to their apartments, he hastened
to join Ilerie in the pavilion in the garden, where she awaited him,
attended only by Cléonice. They set out, and made incredible haste to
pass the frontiers of the kingdom.

The following morning the news was made public, by a letter which
Ilerie had written to the Queen, and another which Atimir had addressed
to the King. They were couched in touching language, and it was easy to
perceive that love had dictated them. The King and Queen were extremely
enraged; but no words can express the agony of the unfortunate and
charming Hebe. What despair! what tears! what petitions to the Fairy
Anguillette to terminate torments equal to the most cruel she had
predicted! But the Fairy kept her word. In vain did Hebe seek the
riverside. Anguillette did not appear, and she abandoned herself to all
the horrors of desperation. The Princes who had been discouraged by the
success of the ungrateful Atimir now felt their hopes revive; but their
attentions and professions only increased the torture of the faithful
Hebe.

The King ardently desired that she should select for herself a husband,
and had several times urged her to do so; but that duty appeared
too cruel to her affectionate heart. She determined to fly from her
father's kingdom; but, before her departure, she went once more in
search of Anguillette. The Fairy could no longer resist the tears of
the beautiful Hebe. She appeared to her, and at her sight the Princess
wept still more, and had not the power to speak to her.

"You have now experienced," said the Fairy, "what that fatal pleasure
which I would never willingly have accorded to you is; but Atimir has
too severely punished you, Hebe, for your neglect of my advice. Go!
Fly these scenes, where everything recalls to you the remembrance of
your love. You will find a vessel on the coast, which will bear you to
the only spot in the world where you can be cured of your unfortunate
attachment; but take care," added Anguillette, raising her voice, "when
your heart shall have regained its tranquillity, that you never seek
to behold again the faithless Atimir, or it will cost you your life!"
Hebe wished more than once to see that Prince again at whatever price
Love might compel her to pay for that gratification; but a whisper
of Reason, and respect for her own honour, induced her to accept the
Fairy's offer. She thanked her for this last favour, and departed the
next morning for the sea-coast, followed by such of her women as she
had most confidence in.

She found the vessel Anguillette had promised her. It was gilt all
over. The masts were of marqueterie of the most admirable pattern; the
sails, of rose-colour and silver tissue; and in every part of it was
inscribed the word "Liberty." The crew were attired in dresses of the
same colours as the sails. All appeared to breathe in this atmosphere
the sweet air of freedom.

The Princess entered a magnificent cabin. The furniture was admirable,
and the paintings perfect. She was as much a prey to sorrow in this new
abode as she was in her father's Court. They strove in vain to amuse
her by a thousand pleasures; she was not yet in a state of mind to pay
the slightest attention to them.

One day while she was contemplating a painting in her cabin, which
represented a landscape, she remarked in it a young shepherd, who, with
a smiling countenance, was depicted cutting nets to set at liberty a
great number of birds that had been caught in them, and some of these
little creatures seemed to be soaring to the skies with marvellous
velocity. All the other pictures displayed similar subjects. None
suggested an idea of love, and all appeared to boast the charms of
Liberty. "Alas!" exclaimed the Princess, sorrowfully, "will my heart
never enjoy that sweet happiness which reason prays for so often in
vain?"

The unfortunate Hebe thus passed her days, struggling between her love
and her desire to forget it. The ship had been a month at sea without
touching anywhere, when one morning that the Princess was on deck she
saw land at a distance, which appeared to be that of a very lovely
country. The trees were of surprising height and beauty, and as the
vessel neared them, she perceived they were covered with birds of the
most brilliant plumage, whose songs made a charming concert. Their
notes were very soft, and it appeared as if they were afraid of making
too much noise. They landed on this beautiful shore. The Princess
descended from the vessel, followed by her women, and from the moment
she breathed the air of this island, some unknown power seemed to set
her heart at rest, and she fell into an agreeable slumber, which for a
short time sealed up her beautiful eyes.

This pleasant country, to which she was a stranger, was the Peaceful
Island. The Fairy Anguillette, a near relation of the Princes who
reigned in these parts, had conferred upon it, for two thousand years,
the happy power of curing unfortunate attachments. It is confidently
asserted that it still possesses that power; but the difficulty is to
find the island.

The Prince who reigned in it at that period, was descended in a right
line from the celebrated Princess Carpillon and her charming husband,
of whom a modern Fairy, wiser and more polished than those of ancient
times, has so gracefully recounted the wonderful adventures.[8]

While the fair Hebe enjoyed a repose, the sweetness of which she had
not tasted for six months, the Prince of the Peaceful Island was taking
an airing in the wood that fringed the shore. He was seated in his car,
drawn by four young white elephants, and surrounded by a portion of
his Court. The sleeping Princess attracted his attention. Her beauty
astonished him. He descended from his car with a haste and vivacity
unusual to his nature. He felt at the sight of her all the love which
the charms of Hebe were worthy to inspire. The noise awoke her, and
on opening her lovely eyes, she was struck by a thousand beauties in
the young Prince. He was of the same age as Hebe--just nineteen. He
was perfectly handsome, his figure full of grace, his height above
the ordinary standard, and his hair, which fell in rich curls down to
his waist, was of the same colour as Hebe's. His dress was composed
of feathers of a thousand different colours, over which he wore a
sort of mantle, with a train all made of swan's-down, and fastened on
his shoulders by the finest jewels in the world. His girdle was of
diamonds, from which hung by golden chains a small sabre, the hilt and
sheath of which were entirely covered with rubies. A sort of helmet,
made of feathers like the rest of his attire, crowned his handsome
head, and on one side of it, fastened by a diamond of prodigious size,
was a plume of heron's feathers, which added greatly to the effect of
his appearance.

The Prince was the first object that presented itself to the eyes
of the young Princess at her waking. He appeared worthy of her
observation, and for the first time in her life she looked upon another
than Atimir with some interest.

"Everything assures me," said the Prince of the Peaceful Island to
the Princess, "that you can be no other than the divine Hebe. Alas!
who else could possess so many charms?" "Who, my Lord," replied the
young Princess, blushing, as she rose to her feet, "could have so soon
informed you of my having landed on this island?" "A powerful Fairy,"
answered the young monarch, "who, desirous of making me the happiest
Prince in the world, and this country the most fortunate, had promised
to lead you hither, and had even permitted me to indulge in the
proudest hopes; but I am too well aware," he added, with a sigh, "that
my fate depends much more upon your favour than upon hers."

After this speech, to which she replied with much propriety, the
Prince requested her to enter his car, that she might be conducted to
the palace; and out of respect to her, he would have declined taking
his place in it, but as she had gathered from his language and his
attendants that he was the sovereign of the island, she insisted on
his seating himself beside her. Never had two such beautiful persons
been seen in the same car. All the Prince's courtiers at the sight
involuntarily burst into a tumult of applause. On the road, the young
Prince entered into conversation with Hebe, with great animation and
tenderness; and the Princess, happy to find her heart once more at
ease, had recovered all her natural vivacity.

They reached the palace; it was not far from the sea-coast. It was
approached through long and beautiful avenues, bordered by canals of
running water. It was built entirely of ivory and roofed with agate.

The Prince's guards were drawn up in line in all the courts. In the
first, they were clothed with yellow feathers, and carried quivers,
bows and arrows of silver. In the second, they were all clothed with
flame-coloured feathers, and wore sabres with golden hilts, and sheaths
ornamented with turquoises. The royal party entered the third court,
in which the guards were dressed in white feathers, and held in their
hands demi-lances painted and gilt, and entwined with garlands of
flowers. There was never any war in that country, so that they did not
carry any formidable weapons.

The Prince, descending from his car, led the lovely Hebe to a
magnificent apartment. His Court was numerous, the ladies were
beautiful; the men gallant and graceful; and although everybody in the
Island was dressed in feathers only, they evinced so much taste in the
arrangement of the colours, that the effect was very agreeable.

That evening, the Prince of the Peaceful Island gave a superb banquet
to the beautiful Hebe, which was followed by a concert of flutes,
lutes, theorbos and harpsichords. In that country they were not fond of
any noisy instruments. The music was very charming; when it had lasted
some time, a very sweet voice sang the following words:--

    Ever to be thy beauty's slave I swear,
      Nor can my heart conceive a happier state
    Than constant bondage in a chain so fair--
      Faithful as fond--on thee depends my fate.

The Prince gazed on Hebe while this tender air was sung, with an
expression which persuaded her that the verses but declared his own
sentiments.

When the concert was over, the Prince of the Peaceful Island, as it was
late, led the Princess to the apartment selected for her. It was the
most beautiful room in the palace. She found in it a great many ladies,
who had been chosen by the Prince to have the honour of attending upon
her.

The Prince quitted the beautiful Hebe the most enamoured of men. The
Princess retired to rest, the ladies of the Court withdrew, and no one
remained in the bed-chamber except the attendants she had brought with
her. "Who could have believed it?" said she to them, as soon as they
were left together, "my heart is tranquil. What deity has appeased my
sufferings? I no longer love Atimir. I can think that he is the husband
of Ilerie without dying of grief. Is not all this a dream which passes
around me? No," she continued, after a moment's pause; "for even my
dreams were never so free from agitation." She then returned thanks a
thousand times to Anguillette, and fell asleep.

When she awoke the next morning the Fairy appeared to her with a
gracious smile upon her countenance, which she had not seen her wear
since the fatal day she had requested the gift of love. "At length,"
said the kind Fairy, "I have fortunately brought you hither. Your heart
is free, and therefore it may be happy. I have cured you of a baneful
passion; but, Hebe, may I trust that the fearful torments to which you
have been exposed will sufficiently induce you to shun for ever those
places in which you might chance to meet the ungrateful Atimir." What
promises did not the young Princess make to the Fairy! How repeatedly
did she abjure love and her faithless lover! "Remember, at least, your
promises," rejoined the Fairy, with an air that inspired respect. "You
will perish with Atimir should you ever seek again to behold him;
but everything around you here ought to prevent your entertaining a
desire so fatal to your existence. I will no longer conceal from you
what I have determined upon in your favour. The Prince of the Peaceful
Island is my kinsman. I protect him and his empire. He is young, he
is amiable, and no Prince in the world is so worthy of being your
husband. Reign, then, fair Hebe, in his heart and over his realm. Your
royal father consents to your union. I was in his palace yesterday. I
informed him and the Queen of your present position, and they gave me
full power to care for your future fortunes."

The Princess was greatly tempted to ask the Fairy what news had been
heard of Atimir and Ilerie since her departure, but she dared not,
after so many favours, run the risk of displeasing her. She employed to
thank her all the eloquence the Fairy had gifted her with.

Her attendants now entered the chamber, and the Fairy disappeared. As
soon as Hebe had arisen, twelve children of the most perfect beauty,
dressed as Cupids, brought to her from the Prince twelve crystal
baskets, filled with the most brilliant and fragrant flowers in the
world. These flowers covered sets of jewels of all colours and of
marvellous beauty. In the first basket presented to her, she found a
note containing these lines:--

            TO THE DIVINE HEBE.

    That I adored thee yesterday I swore
    An hundred times; and broken ne'er can be
    The vows I uttered from my fond heart's core;
    For Love himself dictated them to me,
    And beauty such as thine ensureth constancy.

After what the Fairy had ordained, the Princess comprehended that she
ought to receive these attentions from her new admirer as those of a
Prince who was shortly to be her husband.

She received the little Cupids very graciously, and they had scarcely
taken their departure, when twenty-four dwarfs, fancifully, but
magnificently attired, appeared, bearing other presents. They consisted
of dresses made entirely of feathers; but the colours, the work, and
the jewels with which they were ornamented were so beautiful, that the
Princess admitted she had never seen anything so elegant.

She chose a rose-coloured dress to wear that day. Her head-dress
was composed of plumes of the same colour. She appeared so charming
with these new ornaments, that the Prince of the Peaceful Island,
who came to see her as soon as she was dressed, felt his passion for
her redoubled. All the Court hastened to admire the Princess. In the
evening the Prince proposed to the fair Hebe to descend into the
palace gardens, which were admirably laid out.

During the promenade, the Prince informed Hebe that the Fairy had, for
the last four years, led him to expect that Princess's arrival in the
Peaceful Island; "but shortly after that period," added the Prince, "on
my pressing her to fulfil her promise, she appeared distressed, and
said to me, 'The Princess Hebe is destined by her father to another;
but if my science does not deceive me, she will not marry the Prince
who has been chosen for her husband. I will let you know the issue.'
Some months afterwards the Fairy returned to the island. 'Fate favours
you,' said she to me: 'the Prince who was to have married Hebe will
not be her husband, and in a short time you will behold here the most
beautiful Princess in the world.'"

"It is true," replied Hebe, blushing, "that I was to have married the
son of a King whose dominions were adjacent to those of my father;
but, after several events, the love he conceived for the Princess, my
sister, induced him to fly with her from my father's kingdom."

The Prince of the Peaceful Island said a thousand tender things to the
beautiful Hebe respecting the happy destiny which, in accordance with
the Fairy's desire, had brought the Princess into his dominions. She
listened to him with greater pleasure, as it interrupted her account of
her own adventures, for she feared she could not speak of her faithless
lover without the Prince's observing how great had been her affection
for him.

The Prince of the Peaceful Island led Hebe into a grotto, highly
decorated, and embellished by wonderful fountains. The further end
of the grotto was dark; there were a great many niches in it, filled
with statues of nymphs and shepherds, but they could scarcely be
distinguished in the obscurity. As soon as the Princess had remained a
few minutes in the grotto, she heard some agreeable music. A sudden and
very brilliant illumination disclosed to her that it was a portion of
these statues who were performing this music, whilst the rest advanced,
and danced before her a very elegant and well-conceived ballet. It was
intermixed with sweet and tender songs.

They had placed all the actors in this divertissement in the depths of
the grotto, to surprise the Princess more agreeably.

After the ballet wild men appeared, and served up a superb collation
under an arbour of jasmine and orange flowers.

The entertainment had nearly reached its termination, when suddenly the
Fairy Anguillette appeared in the air, seated in a car drawn by four
monkeys. She descended, and announced to the Prince of the Peaceful
Island a delightful piece of good fortune, by apprising him that it
was her desire he should become the husband of Hebe, and that that
beautiful Princess had promised her consent.

The Prince, transported with joy, was uncertain at the moment whether
his first thanks were due to Hebe or to Anguillette; and although joy
does not inspire one with such affecting expressions as sorrow, he
nevertheless acquitted himself with much talent and grace.

The Fairy determined not to leave the Prince and Princess before the
day fixed for their union. It was to be in three days. She made superb
presents to the fair Hebe and to the Prince of the Peaceful Island, and
at length, on the day she had named, they repaired, followed by their
whole Court and an infinite number of the inhabitants of the Island, to
the temple of Hymen.

It was constructed simply of branches of olive and palmtrees
interlaced, and which, by the power of the Fairy, never withered.

Hymen was therein represented by a statue of white marble, crowned with
roses, elevated on an altar, decorated only with flowers, and leaning
on a little Cupid of exquisite beauty, who, with a smiling countenance,
presented to him a crown of myrtle.

Anguillette, who had erected this temple, resolved that everything in
it should be marked by the greatest simplicity, to show that love alone
could render Hymen happy. The difficulty is to unite them. As it was a
miracle worthy the power of a Fairy, she had joined them indissolubly
in the Peaceful Island, and, contrary to the custom in other kingdoms,
one could there be married, and remain fond and faithful.

In this temple of Hymen the fair Hebe, led by Anguillette, plighted her
troth to the Prince of the Peaceful Island, and received his vows with
pleasure. She did not feel for him the same involuntary inclination
which she had done for Atimir; but her heart, being at that moment free
from passion, she received this husband, by command of the Fairy, as a
Prince worthy of her by his personal merit, and still more so by the
affection he bore to her.

The marriage was celebrated by a thousand splendid entertainments, and
Hebe found herself happy with a Prince who adored her.

In the meanwhile the King, Hebe's father, had received some ambassadors
from Atimir, who sent them to request permission for him to espouse
Ilerie. The King, Atimir's father, was dead, and that Prince was
consequently absolute master in his own country. The hand of the
Princess he had carried off was accorded to him with joy. After the
marriage Queen Ilerie sent other ambassadors to her royal parents
to request permission for her to revisit their Court, and to obtain
their forgiveness for the fault which love had caused her to commit,
and which the merit of Atimir might be pleaded in excuse of. The
King consented, and Atimir proceeded to the Palace with his bride.
A thousand entertainments marked the day of their arrival. Shortly
afterwards the fair Hebe and her charming husband sent ambassadors also
to the King and Queen, to announce their marriage to them. Anguillette
had already informed them of the event, but they did not on that
account receive the ambassadors with less delight or distinction.

Atimir was with the King when they were introduced to their first
audience. The lovely form of Hebe could never be effaced from a heart
in which she had reigned with such supreme power. Atimir sighed, in
spite of himself, at the recital of the happiness of the Prince of the
Peaceful Island. He even accused Hebe of being inconstant, forgetting
how much reason he had given her for becoming so.

The ambassadors of the Prince of the Peaceful Island returned to their
sovereign laden with honours and presents. They related to the Princess
how much delight the King and Queen had manifested at the tidings of
her happy marriage. But, oh! too faithful chroniclers, they informed
her at the same time that the Princess Ilerie and Atimir were at the
Court. These names, so dangerous to her peace, renewed her anxiety.
She was happy; but can mortals command uninterrupted felicity?

She could not resist her impatience to return to the Court of the King,
her father. It was only, she said, to see once more him and her mother.
She believed this herself; and how often, when we are in love, do we
mistake our own feelings!

Notwithstanding the threats uttered by the Fairy, in order to prevent
her from revisiting the spot where she might again behold Atimir, she
proposed this voyage to the Prince of the Peaceful Island. At first
he refused. Anguillette had forbidden him to let Hebe go out of his
dominions. She continued to press him. He adored her, and was ignorant
of the passion she had formerly entertained for Atimir. Is it possible
to refuse anything to those we love?

He hoped to please Hebe by his blind obedience. He gave orders for
their departure, and never was there seen such magnificence as was
displayed in his equipage and on board his vessels.

The sage Anguillette, indignant at the little respect paid by Hebe and
the Prince of the Peaceful Island to her instructions, abandoned them
to their destiny, and did not make her appearance to renew the prudent
advice by which they had so little profited.

The Prince and Princess embarked, and after a very prosperous voyage,
arrived at the Court of Hebe's father. The King and Queen were
extremely delighted to behold once more that dear Princess. They were
charmed with the Prince of the Peaceful Island: they celebrated the
arrival of the royal pair by a thousand entertainments throughout the
kingdom. Ilerie trembled on hearing of the return of Hebe. It was
decided that they should meet, and that no reference whatever should be
made to past events.

Atimir requested to be allowed to see Hebe. It appeared to Ilerie,
indeed, that he preferred his request with a little too much eagerness.

The Princess Hebe blushed when he entered her apartment, and they both
felt an embarrassment out of which all their presence of mind could not
extricate them.

The King, who was present, remarked it. He joined in their
conversation; and to render the visit shorter, proposed to the Princess
to descend into the Palace Gardens.

Atimir dared not offer his hand to Hebe. He bowed to her respectfully,
and retired.

But what thoughts and what feelings did he not carry away with him in
his heart! All the deep and tender passion he had formerly felt for
Hebe was rekindled in a moment. He hated Ilerie; he hated himself.
Never was infidelity followed by so much repentance, nor by so much
suffering.

In the evening he went to the Queen's apartments. The Princess Hebe
was there. He had no eyes but for her. He sought assiduously for
an opportunity of speaking to her. She continued to avoid him; but
her glances were too clearly comprehended by him for his peace. He
persisted for some time in compelling her to observe that her eyes had
regained their former empire over him.

Hebe's heart was alarmed by it. Atimir appeared to her still too
charming. She determined to shun him as carefully as he sought her. She
never spoke to him but in presence of the Queen, and then only when she
could not possibly avoid it. She resolved also to advise the Prince of
the Peaceful Island to return speedily to his own kingdom. But with
what difficulty do we endeavour to fly from those we love!

One evening that she was reflecting on this subject, she shut herself
up in her cabinet, in order to indulge in her musings without
interruption. She found in her pocket a note, which had been slipped
into it unperceived by her, and the handwriting of Atimir, which she
recognised, threw her into an agitation which cannot be described. She
considered she ought not to read it; but her heart triumphed over her
reason, and opening it she found these lines:--

    No more my love can to your heart appeal--
    For me indifference alone you feel.
    Your heart, fair Hebe, faithless is in turn,
    So soon my fatal falsehood could it learn.
    Alas, why can you not, with equal speed,
    Back to its early faith the truant lead?

    The happy time is past when Hebe fair,
    Love's pains and pleasures deigned with me to share.
    Both have their fetters broken, it is true,
    But I my bondage hasten to renew.
    Alas! for my sad fault must I atone,
    By languishing in this sweet chain alone?

"Ah, cruel one!" exclaimed the Princess. "What have I done to you that
you seek to rekindle in my soul a passion which has cost me so much
agony?" The tears of Hebe interrupted her utterance.

In the meanwhile Ilerie was tortured by a jealousy which was but too
well founded. Atimir, carried away by his passion, lost all control
over himself. The Prince of the Peaceful Island began to perceive his
attachment to Hebe; but he was desirous of examining more narrowly the
conduct of Atimir before he spoke to the Princess on the subject. He
adored her with unabating constancy, and feared by his remarks to draw
her attention to the passion of his rival.

A few days after Hebe had received Atimir's note, a tournament was
proclaimed. The Princes, and all the young noblemen of the Court, were
invited to break a lance in honour of the ladies.

The King and Queen honoured the tournament with their presence. The
fair Hebe and the Princess Ilerie were to confer the prizes with their
own hands. One was a sword, the hilt and sheath of which were entirely
covered with jewels of extraordinary beauty. The other, a bracelet of
brilliants of the finest water.

All the knights entered for the lists made their appearance with
marvellous magnificence, and mounted on the finest horses in the world.
Each wore the colours of his mistress, and on their shields were
pictured gallant devices, expressive of the sentiments of their hearts.

The Prince of the Peaceful Island was superbly attired, and rode a
dun-coloured horse with black mane and tail of incomparable beauty. In
all his appointments rose colour was predominant. It was the favourite
colour of Hebe. An ample plume of the same hue floated above his light
helmet. He drew down the applause of all the spectators, and looked so
handsome in his brilliant armour, that Hebe mentally reproached herself
a thousand times for entertaining such feelings as the unhappiness of
another had inspired her with.

The retinue of the Prince of the Peaceful Island was numerous. They
were all attired according to the fashion of their country. Everything
around him was elegant and costly. An esquire bore his shield, and all
were eager to examine the device.

It was a heart pierced with an arrow; a little Cupid was depicted
shooting many others at it to inflict fresh wounds, but all except the
first appeared to have been shot in vain. Beneath were these words:--

 "I fear no others."

The colour and the device of the Prince of the Peaceful Island,
rendered it obvious that it was as the champion of the fair Hebe he had
chosen to enter the lists.

The spectators were still admiring his magnificent array, when Atimir
appeared, mounted on a proud and fiery steed, entirely black. The
prevailing colour of the dress he had assumed for that day was what is
usually termed "dead-leaf," unadorned with gold, silver, or jewels; but
on his helmet he wore a tuft of rose-coloured feathers, and although he
affected great negligence in his attire, he was so handsome, and bore
himself so proudly, that from the moment he entered the lists no one
looked at anything else. On his shield, which he carried himself, was
painted a Cupid trampling upon some chains, while at the same time he
was loading himself with others that were heavier. Around the figure
were these words:--

 "These alone are worthy of me."

The train of Atimir were attired in dead-leaf and silver, and on them
he had showered jewels. It was composed of the principal noblemen of
his Court, and although they were all fine-looking men, it was easy
to see by the air of Atimir that he was born to command them. It is
impossible to describe the various emotions which the sight of Atimir
awakened in the hearts of Hebe and Ilerie, and the poignant jealousy
which the Prince of the Peaceful Island felt when he saw floating over
the helmet of Atimir, a plume of the same colour as his own.

The motto of his device kindled his anger into a fury, which he
controlled for the moment, only to choose a better time to vent it on
his rival.

The King and Queen saw clearly enough the audacity and imprudence of
Atimir, and were exceedingly angry with him; but it was not the time to
show it.

The tilting was commenced amidst a flourish of trumpets which rent
the air. It was exceedingly good. All the young knights made proof of
their skill. The Prince of the Peaceful Island, although a prey to his
jealousy, signalized himself particularly, and remained conqueror.

Atimir, who was aware that the prize for the first encounter would be
given by Ilerie, did not present himself to dispute the victory with
the Prince of the Peaceful Island. The judges of the field declared
the latter victor; and, amidst the acclamation and applause of all the
spectators, he advanced with the greatest possible grace to the spot
where the Royal Family were seated, to receive the diamond bracelet.

The Princess Ilerie presented it to him. He received it with due
respect, and having saluted the King, Queen, and Princesses, returned
to his place in the lists.

The mournful Ilerie had too clearly observed the contempt with which
the fickle Atimir had treated the prize destined to be accorded by
her hand. She sighed sadly, while the fair Hebe felt a secret joy
which reason vainly endeavoured to stifle in her heart. Other courses
were run with results similar to those which had preceded them. The
Prince of the Peaceful Island, animated by the presence of Hebe,
performed wonders, and was a second time conqueror; but Atimir, weary
of beholding the glory of his rival, and flattered by the idea of
receiving the prize from the hand of Hebe, presented himself at the
opposite end of the lists.

The rivals gazed at each other fiercely, and the impending encounter
between two such great Princes was distinguished by the fresh agitation
which it excited in the two Princesses. The Princes ran their course
with equal advantage. Each broke his lance fairly without swerving in
his saddle. The acclamations were redoubled, and the Princes, without
giving their horses time to breathe, returned to their places, received
fresh lances, and ran a second course with the same address as the
first. The King, who feared to see Fortune give the victory to either
of these rivals, and in order to spare the feelings of both, sent in
all haste to them to say that they ought to be satisfied with the glory
they had acquired, and to request them to let the tilting terminate for
that day with the course they had just run.

The King's messenger having approached them, they listened with
impatience to the royal request, particularly Atimir, who, seizing the
first opportunity to reply, said, "Go, tell the King that I should be
unworthy the honour he does me in taking an interest in my glory, if I
could remain satisfied without conquest."

"Let us see," rejoined the Prince of the Peaceful Island, clapping
spurs to his horse, "who best deserves the esteem of the King and the
favours of Fortune!"

The King's messenger had not retraced his steps to the royal balcony
before the two rivals, animated by stronger feelings than the mere
desire to carry off the prize of the joust, had met in full career.

Fortune favoured the audacious Atimir: he was the conqueror. The horse
of the Prince of the Peaceful Island, fatigued with the many severe
courses he had run, fell, and rolled his master in the dust.

What joy for Atimir! and what fury for the unfortunate Prince of the
Peaceful Island! Leaping to his feet again instantly, and advancing
to his rival before any one could reach to part them,--"Thou hast
conquered me in these games, Atimir," said he, with an air which
sufficiently expressed his wrath, "but it is with the sword that our
quarrel must be decided." "Willingly," replied the haughty Atimir.
"I will await thee to-morrow at sunrise in the wood that borders the
palace gardens." The Judges of the Field joined them as these last
words were uttered, and the Princes mutually affected unconcern, for
fear the King should suspect and frustrate their intentions. The Prince
of the Peaceful Island remounted his horse, and rode with all the speed
he could urge it to, from the fatal spot where he had been defeated by
Atimir. In the meanwhile that Prince proceeded to receive the prize
of the joust from the hand of Hebe, who presented it to him with a
confusion sufficiently betraying the conflicting emotions in her bosom;
while Atimir, in receiving it, displayed all the extravagancies of a
passionate lover.

The King and Queen, who kept their eyes upon him, could not fail to
observe this, and returned to the Palace much discontented with the
termination of the day. Atimir, occupied only by his passion, left
the lists, forbidding any of his train to accompany him; and Ilerie,
smarting with grief and jealousy, retired to her apartments.

What then were the feelings of Hebe! "I must depart," she said to
herself. "What other remedy is there for the evil I anticipate?"

In the meanwhile, the King and the Queen determined to request Atimir
would return to his own dominions, to avoid the painful consequences
which his love might entail upon them. They resolved also to make the
same proposition to the Prince of the Peaceful Island, in order not to
show any preference for either; but ah! too tardy prudence! whilst they
were deliberating how best to secure the departure of the two Princes,
the rivals were preparing to meet in mortal combat.

Hebe, on returning from the lists, immediately inquired for the Prince
of the Peaceful Island. She was answered that he was in the palace
gardens; that he had desired he might not be followed, and that he
appeared very melancholy. The fair Hebe thought it was her duty to seek
and console him for the slight mischances which had happened to him,
and therefore, without staying a moment in her own apartment, descended
into the gardens, followed only by a few of her women.

In the course of her search for the Prince of the Peaceful Island, she
entered a shady alley, and came suddenly on the enamoured Atimir, who,
transported by his passion, and listening only to its promptings, threw
himself on his knees at a short distance from the Princess, and drawing
the sword which he had that day received from her hand, exclaimed,
"Hear me, beautiful Hebe! or see me die at your feet!"

Hebe's attendants, terrified by the actions of the Prince, rushed upon
him, and endeavoured to force from his grasp the sword, the point of
which he had directed towards himself with desperate resolution. Hebe,
the unhappy Hebe, would have flown from the spot; but how many reasons
concurred to detain her near him she loved!

The desire to suppress the scandal this adventure might create; the
intention to implore Atimir to endeavour to stifle a passion which
was so perilous to them; the pity naturally awakened by so affecting
an object,--everything, in short, conspired to arrest her flight. She
approached the Prince. Her presence suspended his fury. He let fall
his sword at the feet of the Princess. Never was so much agitation,
so much love, so much anguish, displayed in an interview that lasted
but a few minutes. No words can express the feelings of those wretched
lovers during that brief period. Hebe, alarmed at finding herself in
the company of Atimir, almost, perhaps, in sight of the Prince of
the Peaceful Island, made a great effort to depart, and left him
with a command never to see her more. What an order for Atimir! But
for the recollection of the combat to which he had been challenged
by the Prince of the Peaceful Island, he would have turned his sword
an hundred times against his own breast; but he trusted to perish in
revenging himself on his rival.

In the meanwhile, the fair Hebe shut herself up in her own chamber,
to avoid more surely the sight of Atimir. "Relentless Fairy," she
cried, "thou didst only predict my death as the consequence of my again
beholding this unhappy Prince; but the tortures I suffer are a much
more dreadful penalty." Hebe sent her attendants to seek for the Prince
of the Peaceful Island in the gardens, and throughout the Palace; but
he was nowhere to be found, and she became extremely anxious on his
account. They hunted for him all night long, but in vain, for he had
concealed himself in a little rustic building in the middle of the
wood, to be more certain that no one could prevent his proceeding to
the spot fixed on for the combat. He was on the ground at sunrise, and
Atimir arrived a few minutes afterwards. The two rivals, impatient
for revenge and victory, drew their swords. It was the first time the
Prince of the Peaceful Island had wielded his in earnest, for war was
unknown in his island.

He proved, however, not a less redoubtable antagonist on that account
to Atimir. He had little skill, but much bravery, and great love. He
fought like a man who set no value on his life, and Atimir worthily
sustained in this combat the high reputation he had previously
acquired. The Princes were animated by too many vindictive feelings
for their encounter not to terminate fatally. After having fought with
equal advantage for a considerable period, they dealt each other at the
same instant so furious a blow, that both fell to the earth which was
speedily red with their blood.

The Prince of the Peaceful Island fainted with the loss of his; and
Atimir, mortally wounded, uttered but the name of Hebe as he expired
for her sake.

One of the parties in search of the Prince of the Peaceful Island
arrived on the spot, and were horror-struck at the sight of this cruel
spectacle.

The Princess Hebe, urged by her anxiety, had descended into the
gardens. She hastened towards the place from whence she heard the
exclamations of her people, who uttered in confusion the names of the
two Princes, and beheld these fatal and affecting objects. She believed
the Prince of the Peaceful Island was dead as well as Atimir, and at
that moment there was little difference to be distinguished between
them. "Precious lives," exclaimed Hebe, despairingly, after gazing for
an instant on the unfortunate Princes,--"precious lives, which have
been sacrificed for me; I hasten to avenge you by the termination of my
own!" With these words she flung herself upon the fatal sword Atimir
had received from her hands, and buried the point in her bosom before
her people, astonished at this dreadful scene, had power to prevent her.

She expired, and the Fairy Anguillette, moved by so much misery despite
of all the obstacles her science had enabled her to raise, appeared
on the spot which had witnessed the destruction of these beautiful
beings. The Fairy upbraided Fate, and could not restrain her tears.
Then hastening to succour the Prince of the Peaceful Island, who she
knew was still breathing, she healed his wound, and transported him in
an instant to his own island, where, by the miraculous power she had
conferred on it, the Prince consoled himself for his loss, and forgot
his passion for Hebe.

The King and Queen, who had not the advantage of such assistance,
gave themselves up entirely to their sorrow; and time only brought
them consolation. As to Ilerie, nothing could exceed her despair. She
remained constant to her grief, and to the memory of the ungrateful
Atimir.

Meanwhile, Anguillette, having transported the Prince of the Peaceful
Island to his dominions, touched with her wand the sad remains of the
charming Atimir and the lovely Hebe. At the same instant they were
transformed into two trees of the most perfect beauty. The Fairy gave
them the name of _Charmes_,[9] to preserve for ever the remembrance of
the charms which had been so brilliantly displayed in the persons of
these unfortunate lovers.


FOOTNOTES:

[8] This compliment, so deservedly paid to the Countess
d'Aulnoy, proves that this story was written after the production of
that lady's popular fairy tale entitled "La Princesse Carpillon."

[9] _Charmes_ is the French name for that species of elm
called the yok elm.




YOUNG AND HANDSOME.


Once on a time there was a potent Fairy, who endeavoured to resist
the power of Love; but the little god was more potent than the Fairy.
He touched her heart without even employing all his power. A handsome
Knight arrived at the Court of the Fairy in search of adventures. He
was amiable, the son of a king, and had acquired renown by a thousand
noble achievements. His worth was known to the Fairy. Fame had wafted
the report of it even into her dominions.

The person of the young Prince corresponded so entirely with his high
reputation, that the Fairy, moved by so many charms, accepted in a very
short time the proposals which the handsome Knight made to her. The
Fairy was beautiful, and he was sincerely in love with her. She married
him, and by that marriage made him the richest and most powerful King
in the world. They lived a long time most happily together after their
union.

The Fairy grew old, and the King, her husband, although he kept pace
with her in years, ceased to love her as soon as her beauty had
departed. He attached himself to some young beauties of his Court, and
the Fairy was tormented by a jealousy which proved fatal to several
of her rivals. She had had but one daughter by her marriage with the
handsome Knight. She was the object of all her tenderness, and was
worthy of the affection lavished on her.

The Fairies, who were her relations, had endowed her from her birth
with the finest intelligence, the sweetest beauty, and with graces
still more charming than beauty. Her dancing surpassed anything that
had ever been seen, and her voice subdued all hearts.

Her form was perfect symmetry. Without being too tall, her appearance
was noble. Her hair was of the most beautiful black in the world. Her
mouth small and exquisitely formed, her teeth of surprising whiteness.
Her lovely eyes were black, sparkling, and expressive, and never did
glances so piercing and yet so tender awaken love in the bosoms of all
beholders.

The Fairy had named her Young and Handsome. She had not as yet endowed
her herself. She had postponed that favour in order to judge the
better in process of time by what sort of benefit she could ensure the
happiness of a child that was so dear to her.

The King's inconstancies were an eternal source of affliction to the
Fairy. The misfortune of ceasing to be loved induced her to believe
that the most desirable of blessings was to be always lovely. And this,
after a thousand reflections, was the gift she bestowed on Young and
Handsome. She was then just sixteen: and the Fairy employed all her
science in the formation of a spell which should enable the Princess to
remain for ever exactly as she appeared at that moment. What greater
benefit could she bestow on Young and Handsome than the happiness of
never ceasing to be like herself? The Fairy lost the King, her husband,
and although he had been long unfaithful to her, his death caused her
such deep sorrow, that she resolved to abandon her empire, and to
retire to a castle which she had built in a country quite a desert, and
surrounded by so vast a forest that the Fairy alone could find her way
through it.

This resolution sadly afflicted Young and Handsome. She wished not to
quit her mother; but the Fairy peremptorily commanded her to remain;
and before she returned to her wilderness, she assembled in the most
beautiful palace in the world all the pleasures and sports she had long
banished, and composed from them a Court for Young and Handsome, who in
this agreeable company gradually consoled herself for the absence of
the Fairy.

All the Kings and Princes who considered themselves worthy of her (and
in those days people flattered themselves much less than they do now)
came in crowds to the Court of Young and Handsome, and endeavoured by
their attentions and their professions to win the heart of so lovely a
Princess.

Never had anything equalled the magnificence and amusements of the
palace of Young and Handsome. Each day was distinguished by some new
entertainment. Everybody composing it was happy, except her lovers,
who adored her without hope. She looked with favour upon none; but
they saw her daily, and her most indifferent glances were sufficiently
attractive to detain them there for ever.

One day Young and Handsome, content with the prosperity and popularity
of her reign, wandered into a pleasant wood, followed only by some
of her nymphs, the better to enjoy the charm of solitude. Absorbed
by agreeable reflections, (what could she think of that would not be
agreeable?) she emerged from the wood unconsciously, and walked towards
a charming meadow enamelled with thousands of flowers.

Her beautiful eyes were occupied in contemplating a hundred various and
pleasing objects, when they lighted in turn on a flock of sheep which
was quietly feeding in the meadow on the bank of a little brook that
murmured sweetly as it rippled over the pebbles in its path. It was
overshadowed by a tuft of trees. A young shepherd, stretched on the
grass beside the rivulet, was calmly sleeping; his crook was leaning
against a tree, and a pretty dog, which appeared to be more a favourite
of its master than the guardian of his flock, lay close to the shepherd.

Young and Handsome approached the brook, and cast her eyes upon the
youth. What a beautiful vision! Cupid himself sleeping in the arms of
Psyche did not display such charms.

The young Fairy stood gazing, and could not restrain some gestures
of admiration, which were quickly succeeded by more tender emotions.
The handsome shepherd appeared to be about eighteen, of a commanding
form; his brown hair, naturally curling, fell in wavy locks upon his
shoulders, and was in perfect harmony with the most charming face in
the world. His eyes, closed in slumber, concealed from the Fairy,
beneath their lids, new fires reserved by Love to redouble her passion
for the shepherd.

Young and Handsome felt her heart agitated by an emotion to which it
had hitherto been a stranger, and it was no longer in her power to stir
from the spot.

Fairies possess the same privilege as goddesses. They love a shepherd
when he is loveable, just as if he were the greatest monarch in the
universe. For all classes of mortals are equally beneath them.

Young and Handsome found too much pleasure in her new sensations to
endeavour to combat them. She loved fondly, and from that moment only
indulged in the happy idea of being loved in return. She did not dare
to wake the handsome shepherd, for fear he should remark her agitation;
and pleasing herself with the notion of discovering her love for him in
a gallant and agreeable manner. She rendered herself invisible to enjoy
the astonishment she was about to cause him.

Immediately arose a strain of enchanting music. What an exquisite
symphony! It went straight to the heart. The delicious sound awoke
Alidor (such was the name of the handsome shepherd), who for some
moments imagined he was in an agreeable dream; but what was his
surprise when, on rising from the grass on which he had been lying, he
found himself attired in the most tasteful and magnificent fashion.
The colours of his dress were yellow and grey, laced with silver.
His wallet was embroidered all over with the initials of Young and
Handsome, and suspended by a band of flowers. His crook was of the most
marvellous workmanship, ornamented with precious stones of different
colours set in elegant devices. His hat was composed entirely of
jonquils and blue hyacinths most ingeniously woven together.

Delighted and astonished at his new attire, he gazed at himself
reflected in the neighbouring stream. Young and Handsome, meanwhile,
feared an hundred times for him the fate of the beautiful Narcissus.

The wonder of Alidor was still further increased at seeing his sheep
covered with silk whiter than snow, in lieu of their ordinary fleeces,
and adorned with a thousand knots of ribbons of various colours.

His favourite ewe was more decorated than any of the others. She came
skipping over the grass to him, appearing proud of her ornaments.

The shepherd's pretty dog had a golden collar, on which bands of small
emeralds formed these four lines:--

    Alas! how many fears and doubts alarm
    The maiden who on love her hopes would rest;
    A look, a word, her youthful heart may charm,
    But constancy alone can make it blest.

The handsome shepherd judged by these verses that he was indebted to
Love for his agreeable adventure. The sun, by this time, had set.
Alidor, absorbed in a delightful reverie, bent his steps towards his
cottage. He did not observe any change in its exterior, but he had
scarcely crossed the threshold when a delicious fragrance announced to
him some agreeable novelty. He found the walls of his little hut hung
with a tissue of jasmine and orange flowers. The curtains of his bed
were of the same materials, looped up by garlands of pinks and roses.
An agreeable atmosphere kept all these flowers perfectly fresh and
beautiful.

The floor was of porcelain, on which were represented the stories of
all the goddesses who had been in love with shepherds. Alidor observed
this;--he was very intelligent. The shepherds of that country were not
ordinary shepherds. Some of them were descended from Kings or great
Princes, and Alidor could trace his pedigree up to a Sovereign who had
long sat on the throne of those realms before they became a portion of
the dominions of the Fairies.

Up to this period the handsome shepherd had been insensible to the
charms of Love; but he now began to feel, even without having as yet
distinguished the particular object, that his young heart burned to
surrender itself a prisoner. He was dying with impatience to become
acquainted with the Goddess or Fairy who had bestowed upon him such
tasteful and beautiful proofs of her affection. He paced his chamber
with a sweet anxiety which he had never before experienced. As night
fell, an agreeable illumination appeared to shed a new daylight
throughout the cottage. The musings of Alidor were interrupted by
the sight of a rich and delicate banquet, which was served up to him
by invisible hands. "What!" exclaimed the shepherd, smiling; "still
new pleasures, and no one to partake them with me?" His little dog
attempted to play with him, but he was too much pre-occupied to
encourage his gambols.

Alidor seated himself at the table. A little Cupid appeared and
presented him with wine in a cup made of one entire diamond. The
shepherd made a tolerable supper for the hero of such adventures. He
endeavoured to question the little Cupid; but, instead of answering,
the boy shot arrows at him, which, the moment they struck, became drops
of exquisitely scented water. Alidor comprehended clearly by this sport
that the little Cupid was forbidden to explain the mystery. The table
disappeared as soon as Alidor had ceased eating, and the little Cupid
flew away.

A charming symphony stole upon the ear, awaking a thousand tender
sensations in the heart of the young shepherd. His impatience to
learn to whom he was indebted for all these pleasures increased every
instant, and it was with great joy he heard a voice sing the following
words:--

    Under what form, Love, wilt thou cast thy dart
    At the young shepherd who enthrals my heart?
    Once should he know he is the master there,
    Will he my form and face account less fair?
    Of my affection he will be too sure,
    But that may not his love for me secure.
    With greater power to charm, my smiles endue,
    I need no aid to make me fond or true.

"Appear, thou charming being!" exclaimed the shepherd; "and by your
presence crown my happiness. I believe you to be too beautiful to fear
that I should ever be faithless."

No answer was returned to this adjuration. The music ceased shortly
afterwards; a profound silence reigned in the cottage and invited the
shepherd to sweet repose. He threw himself on his bed, but it was some
time before he could sleep, agitated as he was by his curiosity and his
new-born passion.

The song of the birds awoke him at daybreak. He quitted his cottage and
led his pretty flock to the same spot where the preceding day his good
fortune had commenced. Scarcely had he seated himself beside the brook,
when a canopy, composed of a most brilliant stuff of flame-colour and
gold was attached to the branches of the nearest trees to shelter
Alidor from the rays of the sun. Some young shepherds and pretty
shepherdesses of the neighbourhood arrived at the spot. They were in
search of Alidor. His canopy, his flock, and his dress excited in them
great astonishment.

They advanced hastily, and eagerly asked him the origin of all these
marvels. Alidor smiled at their surprise, and recounted to them what
had occurred to him. More than one shepherd felt jealous, and more
than one shepherdess reddened with mortification. There were few of the
latter in those parts who had not had designs upon the heart of the
handsome shepherd, and a goddess or a fairy appeared to them by far too
dangerous a rival.

Young and Handsome, who rarely lost sight of her shepherd, endured with
considerable impatience the conversation of the shepherdesses. Some
amongst them were very charming, and one so lovely that she might be a
formidable rival even to a goddess.

The indifference with which Alidor treated them all re-assured the
young Fairy. The shepherdesses quitted Alidor reluctantly, and led
their flocks further into the meadow.

Shortly after they had departed, leaving only a few shepherds with
Alidor, a delicious banquet appeared, set out upon a marble table.
Seats of green turf arose around it, and Alidor invited his friends,
the shepherds who had come to join him, to share his repast. On seating
themselves at the table, they discovered that they were all attired in
handsome dresses, though less magnificent than that of Alidor, which at
the same moment became dazzling with jewels.

The neighbouring echoes were suddenly awakened by rustic, but graceful,
music, and a voice was heard singing the following words:--

    Of Alidor, envy the pleasure supreme,
    He only could love to this bosom impart;
    Ye shepherds, who beauty and worth can esteem,
    Do honour to him as the choice of my heart.

The astonishment of the shepherds increased every moment. A troop of
young shepherdesses approached the banks of the rivulet. The melody of
the music was not so much the attraction which led them to this spot,
as the desire to see Alidor. They began to dance beneath the trees,
forming an agreeable little _bal-champêtre_.

The young Fairy, who was present all the time, but invisible, assumed
in an instant, with six of her nymphs, the prettiest shepherdesses'
dresses that had ever been seen. Their only ornaments were garlands of
flowers. Their crooks were adorned with them, and Young and Handsome,
with a simple wreath of jonquils, which produced a charming effect in
her beautiful black hair, appeared the most enchanting person in the
world. The arrival of these fair shepherdesses surprised the whole
company. All the beauties of the district felt mortified. There was not
a shepherd who did not eagerly exert himself to do the honours of the
_fête_ to the new-comers.

Young and Handsome, though unknown to them as a Fairy, did not receive
less respect or attract less attention. The sincerest homage is always
paid to beauty. Young and Handsome felt flattered by the effect of her
charms unaided by the knowledge of her dignity.

As to Alidor, the instant she appeared amongst them, forgetting that
the love which a goddess or a fairy bore to him bound him to avoid
anything that might be displeasing to her, he flew towards Young
and Handsome, and accosting her with the most graceful air in the
world:--"Come, beautiful shepherdess," said he, "come and occupy a
place more worthy of you. So exquisite a person is too superior to
all other beauties to remain mingled with them." He offered his hand,
and Young and Handsome, delighted with the sentiments which the sight
of her had begun to awaken in the breast of her shepherd, allowed
herself to be led by Alidor beneath the canopy which had been attached
to the trees as soon as he had arrived at the spot that morning. A
troop of young shepherds brought, by his orders, bundles of flowers
and branches, and constructed with them a little throne, on which
they seated Young and Handsome. Alidor laid himself at her feet. Her
nymphs seated themselves near her, and the rest of the party formed a
large circle, in which everybody took their places according to their
inclinations.

This spot, adorned with so much beauty, presented the most agreeable
spectacle in the world. The murmur of the brook mingled with the music,
and it seemed as if all the birds in the neighbourhood had assembled
there to take their parts in the concert. A great number of shepherds
advanced, in separate groups, to pay their court to Young and Handsome.
One amongst them, named Iphis, approaching the young Fairy, said to
her, "However distinguished may be the place Alidor has induced you
to accept, it is one, perhaps, very dangerous to occupy." "I believe
so," answered the Fairy, with a smile that had power to captivate all
hearts. "The shepherdesses of this village will find it difficult
to forgive me the preference which Alidor appears to have accorded
to me amongst so many beauties more deserving of it." "No," rejoined
Iphis; "our shepherdesses will be more just; but Alidor is beloved
by a goddess." And thereupon Iphis related to Young and Handsome the
adventure which had befallen the beautiful shepherd. When he had
finished his story, the young Fairy, turning towards Alidor with a
gracious air, said to him, "I do not desire to provoke so terrible an
enemy as the goddess by whom you are beloved. Evidently she did not
intend me to occupy this position, and therefore I resign it to her."

She rose as she said these words, but Alidor, gazing fondly upon her,
exclaimed, "Stay, lovely shepherdess; there is no goddess whose love
I would not sacrifice for the delight of adoring you; and she of whom
Iphis speaks is not over wise, at least in matters of the heart,
since she has permitted me to behold you!" Young and Handsome could
not make any reply to Alidor. The shepherds at that moment came to
request her to dance, and never was more grace displayed than on this
occasion. Alidor was her partner, who surpassed himself. Never had the
most magnificent _fêtes_ at the Court of Young and Handsome afforded
her so much pleasure as this rural entertainment. Love embellishes
every spot in which we behold the object of our affections. Alidor
felt his passion increasing every instant, and made a thousand vows
to sacrifice all the goddesses and fairies in the world to the ardent
love with which his shepherdess had inspired him. Young and Handsome
was delighted with the evident attachment of the beautiful shepherd;
but she wished to make a momentary trial of his affection. Iphis was
amiable, and, if Alidor had not been present, would no doubt have
been much admired. The young Fairy spoke to him twice or thrice very
graciously, and danced several times with him.

Alidor burned with a jealousy as intense as his love. Young and
Handsome observed it, and feeling more sure of her shepherd's heart,
she ceased paining it, spoke no more to Iphis during the rest of the
day, and bestowed on Alidor her most encouraging glances. Heavens! what
glances! they would have filled the most insensible hearts with love.

Evening having arrived, the lovely company separated with regret.
A thousand sighs followed Young and Handsome, who forbade any of
the shepherds to accompany her; but she promised Alidor, in a few
brief words, that he should see her again in the meadows the next
morning. She departed, followed by her nymphs and watched by the
shepherds, who were in hopes that, by following her at a distance,
they might discover, without her perceiving them, the village to
which these divine beings belonged; but the moment that Young and
Handsome had entered a little wood which concealed her from the sight
of the shepherds, she rendered herself and her nymphs invisible, and
they amused themselves for some time in seeing the shepherds vainly
endeavouring to trace the road they had taken. Young and Handsome
observed with pleasure that Alidor was amongst the most eager of the
party.

Iphis was in despair that he had not followed them closely enough, and
several of the shepherds, who had been captivated by the nymphs, passed
half of the night in hunting the woods and the neighbourhood. Some
authors have asserted that the nymphs, following the example of the
young Fairy, thought some of these shepherds more charming than all the
kings they had ever seen in their lives.

Young and Handsome returned to her palace, and, although a Fairy,
always occupied by a thousand different affairs, might absent herself
without causing much surprise, she found all her lovers exceedingly
uneasy at not having seen her the whole day, but not one of them
ventured to reproach her for it. It was necessary to be a very
submissive and respectful suitor in the palace of Young and Handsome,
or she would speedily issue an order for him to quit her Court. Her
admirers did not even dare to speak to her of their passion. It was
only by their attentions, their respect, and their constancy, that they
could hope eventually to touch her heart.

Young and Handsome appeared little interested in what was passing
around. She ate scarcely any supper, fell into frequent fits of musing,
and the princes, her lovers, attentive to all her actions, imagined
that they heard her sigh several times. She dismissed all the Court
very early, and retired to her apartments.

When one is looking forward to a meeting with those we love, everything
that presents itself in the interim appears very poor and very
troublesome.

The young Fairy, with the nymphs who had followed her all the day,
concealed in a cloud, were transported in an instant to the hut of the
handsome shepherd. He had returned to it, very much vexed at not being
able to ascertain the road his divine shepherdess had taken. Everything
in his cottage was as charming as when he had left it; but as in musing
he cast his eyes upon the floor of his little chamber, he perceived
a change in it. In lieu of paintings from the stories of goddesses
who had been in love with shepherds, he perceived the subjects were
composed of terrible examples of unfortunate lovers who had proved
unworthy of the affection of those divinities.

"You are right," exclaimed the handsome shepherd, on observing these
little pictures; "you are right, Goddess. I deserve your anger; but
wherefore did you permit so lovely a shepherdess to present herself to
my sight? Alas! what divinity could defend a heart from the effects of
such charms!" Young and Handsome had arrived in the cottage when Alidor
uttered these words. She felt all the tenderness of them, and her
affection was redoubled by them.

As on the previous day, a magnificent repast appeared, but Alidor did
not enjoy it as he did the first. He was in love, and even a little
jealous; for it often recurred to him that his shepherdess had spoken
with some interest to Iphis. The promise, however, that she had made
him, that he should see her the next day in the meadow, soothed a
little his vexation.

The little Cupid waited on him during his repast, but Alidor, occupied
by his new anxiety, spoke not a word to him. The table disappeared,
and the child, approaching Alidor, presented him with two magnificent
miniature cases, and then flew away.

The handsome shepherd opened one of the cases hastily. It contained the
portrait of a young female of such perfect beauty, that imagination can
scarcely conceive it. Under this marvellous miniature was written, in
letters of gold--

 "Thy happiness depends on her affection."

"One must have seen my shepherdess," said Alidor, gazing on this
beautiful portrait, "not to be enchanted by so lovely a person." He
closed the case, and flung it carelessly on a table.

He then opened the other case which the little Cupid had given to him;
but what was his astonishment at the sight of the portrait of his
shepherdess, resplendent with all the charms that had made so lively an
impression on his heart!

She was painted as he had seen her that very day--her hair dressed
with flowers, and the little that appeared of her dress was that of
a shepherdess. The handsome shepherd was so transported with his
love, that he gazed on it for a long time without perceiving that the
following words were written beneath the portrait:--

 "Forget her attractions, or thy love will be fatal to thee."

"Alas!" exclaimed Alidor, "without her could there be any happiness?"
This ecstasy delighted Young and Handsome. The beautiful face he had
contemplated unmoved was only a fancy portrait. The young Fairy was
desirous of ascertaining whether her shepherd would prefer her to so
beautiful a person, and who appeared to be a goddess or a fairy.

Convinced of the love of Alidor, she returned to her palace, after
having assembled her nymphs by a signal that had been agreed upon. It
was the illumination of the sky by some harmless lightning, and since
that time such is often to be seen on a summer evening, unaccompanied
by thunder. The nymphs rejoined her: they had also desired to hear
something more of their lovers. Some of them were sufficiently pleased.
They had found their swains occupied with recollections of them, and
speaking of them with ardour, but others were less satisfied with the
effect of their beauty. They found their shepherds fast asleep. A man
may sometimes appear very much in love during the day, who is not
sufficiently so for his passion to keep him awake all night.

The young Fairy retired to rest as soon as she arrived at her palace,
charmed with the sincere affection of her shepherd. She had no other
anxiety than the agreeable one arising from her impatience to see him
again. As to Alidor, he slept a little, and without alarming himself at
the warnings which he had read beneath the two miniatures. He thought
only of returning to the meadow: he hoped to see his shepherdess there
during the day. It seemed to him that he could not get there soon
enough.

He led his charming flock to the fortunate spot where he had seen Young
and Handsome; his pretty dog took good care of it. The comely shepherd
could think of nothing but his shepherdess.

Young and Handsome was, much against her will, occupied that morning
receiving the ambassadors of several neighbouring monarchs. Never were
audiences so short; yet, notwithstanding, a considerable portion of the
day passed in the performance of these tiresome ceremonies. The young
Fairy suffered as much as her shepherd, whose keen impatience caused
him a thousand torments.

The sun had set. Alidor had no longer any hope of seeing his
shepherdess that day. How great was his grief!

He deplored his fate. He sighed incessantly. He made verses on her
absence, and with the ferrule of his crook engraved them on the trunk
of a young elm.

    You on whom Venus looks with envious eyes,
    While round your steps her truant Graces play,--
    You on whose glances Cupid so relies
    That he has thrown all other darts away;
    How wretched in your absence must I be
    Who prize you ev'ry earthly bliss above!--
    And yet my sorrow has a charm for me,
    Its gloom is but the shadow of my love.

As he finished carving these lines, Young and Handsome appeared
in the meadow at a distance, with her nymphs all still attired as
shepherdesses. Alidor recognised her a long way off. He ran--he flew
towards Young and Handsome, who received him with a smile so charming,
that it would have increased the felicity of the gods themselves.

He told his love to her with an ardour capable of persuading a heart
less tenderly inclined towards him than that of the young Fairy. She
desired to see what he had carved on the tree, and was charmed with
the talent and affection of her shepherd. He related to her all that
happened to him the preceding evening, and offered a thousand times to
follow her to the end of the world to fly from the love which a goddess
or a fairy had unfortunately conceived for him. "My loss would be too
great should you fly from that fairy," replied Young and Handsome, in
her sweetest manner. "It is no longer necessary for me to disguise my
sentiments from you, as I am convinced of the sincerity of yours. It
is I, Alidor!" continued the charming Fairy--"It is I who have given
you these proofs of an affection which, if you continue faithful to me,
will ensure your happiness and mine for ever!"

The handsome shepherd, transported with love and joy, flung himself at
her feet, his silence appeared more eloquent to the young Fairy than
the most finished oration. She bade him rise, and he found himself
superbly attired. The Fairy then touching the ground with her crook,
there appeared a magnificent car, drawn by twelve white horses of
surpassing beauty. They were harnessed four abreast. Young and Handsome
stepped into the car, and caused the comely shepherd to take his seat
beside her. Her nymphs found room in it also, and as soon as they had
all taken their places, the beautiful horses, who had no occasion for
a driver to intimate to them the intentions of their mistress, swiftly
conveyed the whole party to a favourite château belonging to the young
Fairy. She had adorned it with everything that her art could furnish
her with in the way of wonders. It was called the Castle of Flowers,
and was the most charming residence in the world.

The young Fairy and her happy lover arrived with the attendant nymphs
in a spacious court-yard, the walls of which were formed out of thick
hedges of jasmines and lemon-trees. They were only breast-high. Beneath
them ran a lovely river, which encompassed the court-yard; beyond it a
charming grove, and then fields stretching as far as the eye could see,
through which the said river made a thousand windings, as unwilling to
quit so beautiful a home.

The castle was more to be admired for its architecture than for its
size. It contained twelve apartments, each of which had its peculiar
beauty. They were very spacious; but there was not room enough in them
for the residence of Young and Handsome, and all her Court, which was
the most numerous and magnificent in the universe. The young Fairy used
this castle but as a place of retreat. She was accompanied thither
generally by only her most favourite nymphs and the officers of her
household.

She led the shepherd into the Myrtle Room. All the furniture was made
of myrtles in continual blossom, interlaced with an art that displayed
the power and good taste of the young Fairy, even in the most simple
things. All the rooms in the castle were furnished in the same manner,
with flowers only. The air breathed in them was always fragrant and
pure.

Young and Handsome, by her power, had banished for ever from the spot
the rigours of winter, and if the heats of summer were ever permitted
to penetrate these agreeable bowers, it was only to render more
enjoyable the beautiful baths attached to the building, which were
delicious.

The apartment was of white and blue porphyry, exquisitely sculptured;
the baths being of the most curious and agreeable forms. That in which
Young and Handsome bathed, was made out of a single topaz, and placed
on a platform in an alcove of porcelain. Four columns, composed of
amethysts of the most perfect beauty, supported a canopy of magnificent
yellow and silver brocade, embroidered with pearls. Alidor, absorbed
by the happiness of beholding the charming Fairy, and remarking her
affection for him, scarcely noticed all these marvels.

A delightful and tender conversation detained these happy lovers for
a long time in the Myrtle Room. A splendid supper was served in the
Jonquil Saloon. An elegant entertainment followed. The nymphs acted to
music the loves of Diana and Endymion.

Young and Handsome forgot to return to her palace, and passed the
night in the Narcissus Chamber. Alidor, entranced with love, was long
before he tasted the sweets of slumber in the Myrtle Room, to which he
was conducted by the nymphs, on the termination of the entertainment.
Young and Handsome, who forbore to use her power to calm such agreeable
emotions, also laid awake till nearly daybreak.

Alidor, impatient to behold again the charming Fairy, awaited the happy
moment for some time in the Jonquil Saloon. He had neglected nothing
in his attire which could add a grace to his natural attractions.
Young and Handsome appeared a thousand times more lovely than Venus.
She passed a part of the day with Alidor and the nymphs in the garden
of the castle, the beauties of which surpassed the most marvellous
description. There was an agreeable little _fête champêtre_ in a
delicious grove, wherein Alidor, during a favourable opportunity, had
the sweet pleasure of professing his ardent love to Young and Handsome.

She desired, that same evening, to return to her palace; but promised
Alidor to come back to him the next day. Never has an absence of a
few hours been honoured by so many regrets. The handsome shepherd
passionately desired to follow the young Fairy, but she commanded him
to remain in the Castle of Flowers. She wished to hide her attachment
from the eyes of all her Court. No one entered this castle without her
order, and she had no fear that her nymphs would disclose her secret.
The secrets of a Fairy are always safe. They are never divulged; the
punishment would follow the offence too swiftly.

Young and Handsome asked Alidor for the pretty dog which had always
followed him, that she might take it with her. Everything is dear to us
that pleases those we love.

After the departure of the young Fairy, the shepherd, to indulge in
his anxiety, rather than to dissipate it, plunged deeper into the
woods to muse on his adorable mistress. In a little meadow, enamelled
with flowers, and watered by an agreeable spring, which arose near the
middle of the wood, he perceived his flock gambolling in the grass. It
was watched by six young female slaves, with handsome features, dressed
in blue and gold, with golden chains and collars. His favourite sheep
recognised her master and ran to him. Alidor caressed her, and was
deeply touched by the attentions of Young and Handsome to everything
which concerned him.

The young slaves showed Alidor their hut. It was not far from the spot,
at the end of a beautiful and very shady alley. This little dwelling
was built of cedar. The initials of Young and Handsome and Alidor
entwined together, appeared in every part of it, formed with the rarest
woods. The following inscription was written in letters of gold upon a
large turquoise:--

    Let the flock of him I love
    In these meads for ever rove.
    By that Shepherd loved, the lot
    Of the Gods I envy not.

The handsome shepherd returned to the Castle of Flowers, enchanted by
the kindness of the young Fairy. He declined any entertainment that
evening. When absent from those we love, what care we for amusements!

Young and Handsome returned the next day, as she had promised, to her
happy lover. What joy was theirs to behold each other again! All the
power of the young Fairy had never procured for her so much felicity.

She passed nearly all her time at the Castle of Flowers, and rarely now
appeared at Court. In vain did the princes, her suitors, grieve almost
to death at her absence, everything was sacrificed to the fortunate
Alidor.

But could so sweet a happiness last long untroubled? Another Fairy,
besides Young and Handsome, had seen the beautiful shepherd, and felt
her heart also touched by his charms.

One evening that Young and Handsome had gone to show herself for
a few moments to her Court, Alidor, engrossed by his passion, sat
deeply musing in the Jonquil Saloon, when his attention was awakened
by a slight noise at one of the windows, and on looking towards it he
perceived a brilliant light, and the next moment he saw on a table,
near which he was seated, a little creature about half a yard high,
very old, with hair whiter than snow, a standing collar, and an
old-fashioned farthingale. "I am the Fairy Mordicante," said she to
the handsome shepherd; "and I come to announce to thee a much greater
happiness than that of being beloved by Young and Handsome." "What can
that be?" inquired Alidor, with a contemptuous air. "The gods have none
more perfect for themselves!" "It is that of pleasing me," replied the
old Fairy, haughtily. "I love thee, and my power is far greater than
that of Young and Handsome, and almost equals that of the Gods. Abandon
that young Fairy for me. I will revenge thee on thine enemies, and on
all whom thou wouldst injure."

"Thy favours are useless to me," answered the young shepherd, with a
smile; "I have no enemies, and I would injure no one; I am too well
satisfied with my own lot; and if the charming Fairy I adore were but a
simple shepherdess, I could be as happy with her in a cottage as I am
now in the loveliest palace in the world." At these words the wicked
Fairy became suddenly as tall and as large as she had hitherto been
diminutive, and disappeared making a horrible noise.

The next morning, Young and Handsome returned to the Castle of Flowers.
Alidor related his adventure. They both knew the Fairy Mordicante.
She was very aged, had always been ugly, and exceedingly susceptible.
Young and Handsome and her happy lover made a thousand jokes upon her
passion, and never for a moment felt the least uneasiness as to the
consequences of her fury.

Can one be a happy lover and think of future misfortunes?

A week afterwards, Young and Handsome and the lovely shepherd took an
excursion in a fine barge, gilt all over, on the beautiful river which
encircled the Castle of Flowers, followed by all their little Court
in the prettiest boats in the world. The barge of Young and Handsome
was shaded by a canopy formed of a light blue and silver tissue. The
dresses of the rowers were of the same material. Other small boats,
filled with excellent musicians, accompanied the happy lovers, and
performed some agreeable airs. Alidor, more enamoured than ever, could
gaze on nothing but Young and Handsome, whose beauty appeared that day
more charming than can be described.

In the midst of their enjoyment they saw twelve Syrens rise out of the
water, and a moment afterwards twelve Tritons appeared, and joining the
Syrens, encircled with them the little barque of Young and Handsome.
The Tritons played some extraordinary airs on their shells, and the
Syrens sang some graceful melodies, which for a while entertained the
young Fairy and the beautiful shepherd. Young and Handsome, who was
accustomed to wonders, imagined that it was some pageant which had
been prepared by those whose duty it was to contribute to her pleasure
by inventing new entertainments; but all on a sudden these perfidious
Tritons and Syrens, laying hold of the young Fairy's boat, dragged it
under water.

The only danger which Alidor feared was that which threatened the
young Fairy. He attempted to swim to her, but the Tritons carried him
off despite his resistance, and Young and Handsome, borne away by the
Syrens in the meanwhile, was transported into her palace.

One Fairy having no power over another, the jealous Mordicante was
compelled to limit her vengeance to the making Young and Handsome
endure all the misery so cruel a bereavement would necessarily
occasion. In the meanwhile Alidor was conveyed by the Tritons to a
terrible castle guarded by winged dragons. It was there that Mordicante
had determined to make herself beloved by the beautiful shepherd,
or to be revenged on him for his disdain. He was placed in a very
dark chamber. Mordicante, blazing with the most beautiful jewels in
the world, appeared to him, and professed her affection for him. The
shepherd, exasperated at being torn from Young and Handsome, treated
the wicked Fairy with all the contempt she deserved. What could equal
the rage of Mordicante? But her love was still too violent to permit
her to destroy the object of it. After detaining Alidor several days
in this frightful prison, she resolved to endeavour to conquer the
faithful shepherd by new artifices. She transported him suddenly to
a magnificent palace. He was served with a sumptuousness which had
not been exceeded in the Castle of Flowers. Endeavours were made to
dissipate his grief by a thousand agreeable entertainments, and the
most beautiful nymphs in the universe, who composed his Court, appeared
to dispute with each other the honour of pleasing him. Not a word more
was said to him respecting the passion of the wicked Fairy; but the
faithful shepherd languished in the midst of luxury, and was in no less
despair at his separation from Young and Handsome, when witnessing the
gayest entertainments, than he had been whilst immured in his dreadful
prison.

Mordicante trusted, however, that the absence of Young and Handsome,
the continual round of pleasures provided for Alidor's amusement, and
the presence of so many charming women, would at length overcome the
fidelity of the shepherd; and her object in surrounding him with so
many beautiful nymphs, was but to take herself the figure of the one
which might most attract his attention. With this view, she mingled
amongst them in disguise, sometimes appearing as the most charming
brunette, and at others as the fairest beauty in the universe.

Love, who is all-powerful in human hearts, had subdued for a time her
natural cruelty; but desperation at being unable to shake the constancy
of Alidor re-awakened her fury so powerfully, that she determined to
destroy the charming shepherd, and make him the victim of the faithful
love he cherished for Young and Handsome. One day, without being
seen, she was watching him in a beautiful gallery, the windows of
which opened upon the sea; Alidor, leaning over a balustrade, mused in
silence for a considerable time. But, at length, after a heavy sigh, he
uttered such tender and touching lamentations, depicting so vividly his
passion for the young Fairy, that Mordicante, transported with fury,
appeared to him in her natural shape; and, after having loaded him with
reproaches, caused him to be carried back to his prison, and announced
to him that in three days he should be sacrificed to her hatred, and
that the most cruel tortures should avenge her slighted affection.

Alidor regretted not the loss of a life which had become insupportable
to him, deprived of Young and Handsome; and satisfied that he had
nothing to fear on her account from the wrath of Mordicante, the power
of the young Fairy being equal to hers, he calmly awaited the death he
had been doomed to.

In the meanwhile, Young and Handsome, as faithful as her shepherd,
mourned over his loss. The Syrens who had wafted her back to her palace
had disappeared as soon as their task was accomplished, and the young
Fairy was convinced that it was the cruel Mordicante who had bereft her
of Alidor. The excess of her grief proclaimed at the same time to all
her Court, her love for the young shepherd, and her loss of him.

How many monarchs were envious of the misery even into which the wicked
Fairy had precipitated Alidor? What vexation for these enamoured
princes to learn that they had a beloved rival, and to behold Young and
Handsome occupied only in weeping for this fortunate mortal! His loss,
however, revived their hopes. They had discovered at last that Young
and Handsome could feel as well as inspire affection. They redoubled
their attentions. Each flattered himself with the sweet hope to occupy
some day the place of that fortunate lover; but Young and Handsome,
inconsolable for the absence of Alidor, and worried by the advances of
his rivals, abandoned her Court, and retired to the Castle of Flowers.
The sight of those charming scenes, where everything recalled to her
heart the recollection of the lovely shepherd, increased her melancholy
and her affection.

One day, as she was walking in her beautiful gardens, and gazing on
the various objects with which they were adorned, she exclaimed aloud,
"Alas! ye were formerly my delight; but I am now too much absorbed
by my sorrow to take any further interest in your embellishment."
As she ceased speaking, she heard the murmur of a gentle breeze
that, agitating the flowers of this beautiful garden, arranged them
instantaneously in various forms. First, they represented the initials
of Young and Handsome; then those of another name, which she was not
acquainted with; and a moment afterwards, they formed distinctly entire
words, and Young and Handsome, astonished at this novelty, read these
verses, written in so singular a fashion:--

    Bid fond Zephyr tend thy bowers,
    At his breath awake the flowers.
    Thus for Flora, every morn,
    Doth he mead and grove adorn.
    How much more his pride 'twould be,
    Fairer Nymph, to sigh for thee!

Young and Handsome was pondering on these verses, when she saw the
Deity named in them appear in the air, and hasten to declare his
passion to her. He was in a little car of roses, drawn by a hundred
white canary birds, harnessed ten and ten, with strings of pearl. The
car approached the earth, and Zephyr descended from it close to the
young Fairy. He addressed her with all the eloquence of a very charming
and very gallant Divinity; but the young Fairy, in lieu of feeling
flattered by so brilliant a conquest, replied to him like a faithful
lover. Zephyr was not disheartened by the coldness of Young and
Handsome. He hoped to soften her by his attentions. He paid his court
to her most assiduously, and neglected nothing that he thought could
please her.

The glory of Alidor was now complete. He had a God for his rival, and
was preferred to him by Young and Handsome.

Nevertheless, this fortunate mortal was on the point of being destroyed
by the fury of Mordicante. A year had nearly elapsed since the young
Fairy and the beautiful shepherd had been torn from each other, when
Zephyr, who had given up all hopes of shaking the constancy of Young
and Handsome, and was moved by the tears which he saw her unceasingly
shed for the loss of Alidor, exclaimed one day, on finding her more
depressed than usual, "Since it is no longer possible for me to
flatter myself, charming Fairy, that I shall ever have the good fortune
to gain your affections, I am desirous of contributing at least to your
felicity. What can I do to make you happy?"

  [Illustration: Young and Handsome.--P. 128.]

"To make me happy," replied Young and Handsome, with a look so full of
tenderness that it was enough to revive all the love of Zephyr, "you
must restore to me my Alidor. I am powerless against another Fairy,
but you, Zephyr, you are a God, and can destroy all the spells of my
cruel rival!" "I will endeavour," rejoined Zephyr, "to subdue the
tender sentiments you have inspired me with sufficiently to enable me
to render you an agreeable service." So saying, he flew away, leaving
Young and Handsome to indulge in a sweet hope. Zephyr did not deceive
her. He was not in the habit of loving for any length of time, without
the certainty of eventual success; and it was evident to him that the
young Fairy was too constant for him to hope that he could ever make
her forget Alidor; he therefore flew to the horrible prison where the
beautiful shepherd awaited nothing less than death. An impetuous wind,
swelled by six northern breezes, that had accompanied Zephyr, blew open
in an instant the gates of the dungeon, and the beautiful shepherd,
enveloped in a very brilliant cloud, was wafted to the Castle of
Flowers.

Zephyr, after he had seen Alidor, was less surprised at the constancy
of Young and Handsome; but he did not make himself visible to the
shepherd until he had restored him to the charming Fairy.

Who could describe the perfect joy of Alidor and Young and Handsome at
seeing each other once more? How lovely each appeared, and how fondly
was each beloved! What thanks did not these fortunate lovers render
to the Deity who had secured their happiness. He left them shortly
afterwards to return to Flora.

Young and Handsome was anxious that all her Court should share in her
felicity. They celebrated it by a thousand festivities throughout her
empire, despite the vexation of the princes, her less fortunate lovers,
who were the spectators of the triumphs of the beautiful shepherd.

In order to have nothing more to fear for Alidor from the wrath of
Mordicante, Young and Handsome taught him the Fairy Art, and presented
him with the gift of continual youth. Having thus provided for his
happiness, she next considered his glory. She gave him the Castle of
Flowers, and caused him to be acknowledged king of that beautiful
country, over which his ancestors had formerly reigned. Alidor became
the greatest monarch in the universe, on the same spot where he had
been the most charming shepherd. He loaded all his old friends with
favours; and, retaining for ever his charms, as well as Young and
Handsome, we are assured that they loved each other eternally, and that
Hymen would not disturb a passion which formed the happiness of their
existence.




THE PALACE OF REVENGE.


Once on a time there was a King and Queen of Iceland, who, after twenty
years of married life, had a daughter. Her birth gave them the greatest
pleasure, as they had so long despaired of having children to succeed
to their throne. The young Princess was named Imis; her dawning charms
promised from her infancy all the wonderful beauty which shone with so
much brilliancy when she arrived at a maturer age.

No one in the universe would have been worthy of her had not Cupid,
who thought it a point of honour to subject to his empire, some day,
so marvellous a person, taken care to cause a Prince to be born in the
same Court equally charming with that lovely Princess. He was called
Philax, and was the son of a brother of the King of Iceland. He was two
years older than the Princess, and they were brought up together with
all the freedom natural to childhood and near relationship. The first
sensations of their hearts were mutual admiration and affection. They
could see nothing so beautiful as themselves, consequently they found
no attraction in the world that could interfere with the passion each
felt for the other, even without yet knowing its name.

The King and Queen saw this dawning affection with pleasure. They loved
young Philax. He was a Prince of their blood, and no child had ever
awakened fairer hopes. Everything seemed to favour the designs of Cupid
to render Prince Philax some day the happiest of men. The Princess was
about twelve years old when the Queen, who was exceedingly fond of
her, desired to have her daughter's fortune told by a Fairy, whose
extraordinary science was at that time making a great sensation.

She set out in search of her, taking with her Imis, who, in her
distress at parting with Philax, wondered a thousand and a thousand
times how anybody could trouble themselves about the future when the
present was so agreeable. Philax remained with the King, and all the
pleasures of the Court could not console him for the absence of the
Princess.

The Queen arrived at the Fairy's castle. She was magnificently
received; but the Fairy was not at home. Her usual residence was on the
summit of a mountain at some distance from the castle, where she lived
all alone and absorbed in that profound study which had rendered her
famous throughout the world.

As soon as she heard of the Queen's arrival, she returned to the
castle. The Queen presented the Princess to her, told her her name
and the hour of her birth, which the Fairy knew as well as she did,
though she had not been present at it. The Fairy of the Mountain knew
everything. She promised the Queen an answer in two days, and then
returned to the summit of the mountain. On the morning of the third day
she came back to the castle, bade the Queen descend into the garden,
and gave her some tablets of palm leaves closely shut, which she was
ordered not to open except in the presence of the King.

The Queen, to satisfy her curiosity in some degree, asked her several
questions respecting the fate of her daughter. "Great Queen," replied
the Fairy of the Mountain, "I cannot precisely tell you what sort of
misfortune threatens the Princess. I perceive only that love will
have a large share in the events of her life, and that no beauty
ever inspired such violent passions as that of Imis will do." It was
not necessary to be a fairy to foresee that the Princess would have
admirers. Her eyes already seemed to demand from all hearts the love
which the Fairy assured the Queen would be entertained for her. In
the meanwhile Imis, much less uneasy about her future destiny than at
being separated from Philax, amused herself by gathering flowers; but
thinking only of his love, and in her impatience to depart, she forgot
the bouquet she had begun to compose, and unconsciously flung away the
flowers she had amassed at first with delight. She hastened to rejoin
the Queen, who was taking her leave of the Fairy of the Mountain.
The Fairy embraced Imis, and gazing on her with the admiration she
deserved--"Since it is impossible for me," she exclaimed, after a
short silence, which had something mysterious in it--"since it is
impossible for me, beautiful Princess, to alter in your favour the
decrees of destiny, I will at least endeavour to enable you to escape
the misfortunes it prepares for you." So saying, she gathered with her
own hands a bunch of lilies of the valley, and addressing the youthful
Imis--"Wear always these flowers which I give to you," said she; "they
will never fade, and as long as you have them about your person, they
will protect you from all the ills with which you are threatened by
Fate." She then fastened the bouquet on the head-dress of Imis, and the
flowers, obedient to the wishes of the Fairy, were no sooner placed in
the hair of the Princess, than they adjusted themselves, and formed
a sort of aigrette, the whiteness of which seemed only to prove that
nothing could eclipse that of the complexion of the fair Imis.

The Queen took her departure, after having thanked the Fairy a thousand
times, and went back to Iceland, where all the Court impatiently
awaited the return of the Princess. Never did delight sparkle with more
brilliancy and beauty than in the eyes of Imis and of her lover. The
mystery involved in the plume of lilies of the valley was revealed to
the King alone. It had so agreeable an effect in the beautiful brown
hair of the Princess, that everybody took it simply for an ornament
which she had herself culled in the gardens of the Fairy.

The Princess said much more to Philax about the grief she felt at her
separation from him than about the misfortunes which the Fates had
in store for her. Philax was, nevertheless, alarmed at them; but the
happiness of being together was present, the evils, as yet, uncertain.
They forgot them, and abandoned themselves to the delight of seeing
each other again.

In the meanwhile, the Queen recounted to the King the events of her
journey, and gave him the Fairy's tablets. The King opened and found in
them the following words, written in letters of gold:--

    Fate for Imis hides despair
    Under hopes that seem most fair;
    She will miserable be,
    Through too much felicity.

The King and Queen were much distressed at this oracle, and vainly
sought its explanation. They said nothing about it to the Princess,
in order to spare her an unnecessary sorrow. One day that Philax was
gone hunting, a pleasure he indulged in frequently, Imis was walking
by herself in a labyrinth of myrtles. She was very melancholy because
Philax was so long absent, and reproached herself for giving way
to an impatience which he did not partake. She was absorbed in her
thoughts, when she heard a voice, which said to her, "Why do you
distress yourself, beautiful Princess? If Philax is not sensible of
the happiness of being beloved by you, I come to offer you a heart a
thousand times more grateful--a heart deeply smitten by your charms,
and a fortune sufficiently brilliant to be desired by any one except
yourself, to whom the whole world is subject." The Princess was much
surprised at hearing this voice. She had imagined herself alone in
the labyrinth, and, as she had not uttered a word, she was still more
astonished that this voice had replied to her thoughts. She looked
about her, and saw a little man appear in the air, seated upon a
cockchafer. "Fear not, fair Imis," said he to her; "you have no lover
more submissive than I am; and although this is the first time that
I have appeared to you, I have long loved you, and daily gazed upon
you." "You astonish me!" replied the Princess. "What! You have daily
beheld me, and you know my thoughts? If so, you must be aware that it
is useless to love me. Philax, to whom I have given my heart, is too
charming ever to cease being its master, and although I am displeased
with him, I never loved him so much as I do at this moment. But tell me
who you are, and where you first saw me." "I am Pagan the Enchanter,"
replied he, "and have power over everybody but you. I saw you first
in the gardens of the Fairy of the Mountain. I was hidden in one of
the tulips you gathered. I took for a happy omen the chance which had
induced you to choose the flower I was concealed in. I flattered myself
that you would carry me away with you; but you were too much occupied
with the pleasure of thinking of Philax. You threw away the flowers
as soon as you had gathered them, and left me in the garden the most
enamoured of beings. From that moment I have felt that nothing could
make me happy but the hope of being loved by you. Think favourably of
me, fair Imis, if it be possible, and permit me occasionally to remind
you of my affection." With these words he disappeared, and the Princess
returned to the palace, where the sight of Philax dissipated the alarm
she had felt at this adventure. She was so eager to hear him excuse
himself for the length of time he had been hunting, that she had nearly
forgotten to inform him of what had occurred to her; but at last she
told him what she had seen in the labyrinth of myrtles.

The young Prince, notwithstanding his courage, was alarmed at the
idea of a winged rival, with whom he could not dispute the hand of
the Princess upon equal terms. But the plume of lilies of the valley
guaranteed him against the effect of enchantments, and the affection
Imis entertained for him would not permit him to fear any change in her
heart.

The day after the adventure in the labyrinth, the Princess, on awaking,
saw fly into her chamber twelve tiny nymphs, seated on honey-bees, and
bearing in their hands little golden baskets. They approached the bed
of Imis, saluted her, and then went and placed their baskets on a table
of white marble, which appeared in the centre of the apartment. As soon
as the baskets were set upon it, they enlarged to an ordinary size.
The nymphs having quitted them, again saluted Imis, and one of them,
approaching the bed nearer than the rest, let something fall upon it,
and then they all flew away.

The Princess, despite the astonishment which so strange a sight
occasioned, took up what the nymph had dropped beside her. It was an
emerald of marvellous beauty. It opened the moment the Princess touched
it, and she found it contained a rose leaf, on which she read these
verses.

    Let the world learn, to its surprise,
    The wondrous power of thine eyes.
    Such is the love I bear to thee,
    It makes e'en torture dear to me.

The Princess could not recover from her astonishment. At length she
called to her attendants, who were as much surprised as Imis at the
sight of the table and the baskets. The King, the Queen, and Philax
hastened to the spot on the news of this extraordinary event. The
Princess, in her relation of it, suppressed nothing except the letter
of her lover. She considered she was not bound to reveal that to any
one but Philax. The baskets were carefully examined, and were found to
be filled with jewels of extraordinary beauty, and of so great a value
as to double the astonishment of the spectators.

The Princess would not touch one of them, and having found an instant
when nobody was listening, she drew near to Philax and gave him the
emerald and the rose leaf. He read his rival's letter with much
disquietude. Imis, to console him, tore the rose leaf to pieces before
his face; but ah! how dearly did they pay for that act!

Some days elapsed without the Princess hearing anything of Pagan. She
fancied that her contempt for him would extinguish his passion, and
Philax flattered himself by indulging in a like belief. That Prince
returned to the chase as usual. He halted alone by the side of a
fountain, to refresh himself. He had about him the emerald which the
Princess had given him, and recollecting with pleasure the little value
she set on it, he drew it from his pocket to look at it. But scarcely
had he held it a moment in his hand when it slipped through his
fingers, and, as soon as it touched the ground, changed into a chariot.
Two winged monsters issued from the fountain and harnessed themselves
to it. Philax gazed on them without alarm, for he was incapable of
fear, but he could not avoid feeling some emotion when he found himself
transported into the chariot by an irresistible power, and at the same
moment raised into the air, through which the winged monsters caused
the chariot to fly with a prodigious rapidity. In the meanwhile night
came, and the huntsmen, after searching throughout the wood in vain for
Philax, repaired to the Palace, whither they imagined he might have
returned alone; but he was not to be found there, nor had any one seen
him since he had set out with them for the chase.

The King commanded them to go back and renew their search for the
Prince. All the Court shared in his Majesty's anxiety. They returned to
the wood, they ran in every direction around it, and did not retrace
their steps to the Palace before daybreak, but without having obtained
the least intelligence of the Prince. Imis had passed the night in
despair at her lover's absence, of which she could not comprehend
the cause. She had ascended a terrace of the Palace to watch for the
return of the party that had gone in search of Philax, and flattered
herself she should see him arrive in their company; but no words can
express the excess of her affliction when no Philax appeared, and she
was informed that it had been impossible to ascertain what had become
of him. She fainted; they carried her into the Palace, and one of her
women, in her haste to undress and put her to bed, took out of the hair
of the Princess the plume of lilies of the valley which preserved her
from the power of enchantments. The instant it was removed a dark cloud
filled the apartment, and Imis disappeared. The King and Queen were
distracted at this loss, and nothing could ever console them.

The Princess, on recovering from her swoon, found herself in a chamber
of various-coloured coral, floored with mother-of-pearl, and surrounded
by nymphs, who waited upon her with the most profound respect. They
were very beautiful, and magnificently and tastefully attired. Imis
first asked them where she was. "You are in a place where you are
adored," said one of the nymphs to her. "Fear nothing, fair Princess,
you will find in it everything you can desire." "Philax is here,
then!" exclaimed the Princess, her eyes sparkling with joy. "I desire
only the happiness of seeing him again." "You cherish too long the
recollection of an ungrateful lover," said Pagan, at the same moment
rendering himself visible to the Princess, "and as that Prince has
deserted you, he is no more worthy your affection. Let resentment and
respect for your own pride combine with the passion I entertain for
you. Reign for ever in these regions, lovely Princess; you will find in
them immense treasures, and all imaginable delights will attend your
steps." Imis replied to Pagan's address with tears alone. He left her,
fearing to embitter her grief. The nymphs remained with her, and used
all their endeavours to console her. A magnificent repast was served up
to her. She refused to eat; but at length, on the following morning,
her desire to behold Philax once more made her resolve to live. She
took some food, and the nymphs, to dissipate her sorrow, conducted
her through various portions of the Palace. It was built entirely of
shining shells, mixed with precious stones of different colours, which
produced the finest effect in the world; all the furniture was of gold,
and of such wonderful workmanship that you might easily see it could
only have come from the hands of Fairies.

After they had shown Imis the Palace, the nymphs led her into the
gardens, which were of a beauty not to be described. She found in them
a very brilliant car, drawn by six stags, who were driven by a dwarf.
She was requested to enter the car. Imis complied; the nymphs seated
themselves at her feet. They were driven to the seaside, where a nymph
informed the Princess that Pagan, who reigned in this island, had
made it by the power of his art the most beautiful in the universe.
The sound of instruments interrupted the narration of the nymph.
The sea appeared to be entirely covered with little boats, built of
flame-coloured coral, and filled with everything that could be required
to compose a brilliant aquatic entertainment. In the midst of the small
craft, there was a barque of much larger size, on which the initials of
Imis were seen in every part, formed with pearls. It was drawn by two
dolphins. It approached the shore. The Princess entered it, accompanied
by her nymphs. As soon as she was on board, a superb collation appeared
before her, and her ears were regaled at the same time by exquisite
music which proceeded from the boats around her. Songs were sung, of
which her praise alone was the theme. But Imis paid no attention to
anything. She remounted her car, and returned to the Palace overwhelmed
with sadness. In the evening Pagan again presented himself. He found
her more insensible to his love than ever; but he was not discouraged,
and trusted to the effect of his constancy. He had yet to learn that in
love the most faithful are not always the most happy.

Every day he offered the Princess entertainments worthy of exciting the
admiration of all the world, but which were lost upon her for whom they
were invented. Imis thought of nothing but the absence of her lover.

That unhappy Prince had been transported in the meanwhile, by the
winged monsters, into a forest which belonged to Pagan. It was called
the Dismal Forest. As soon as Philax had arrived in it, the emerald
chariot and the monsters disappeared. The Prince, surprised by this
adventure, summoned up all his courage to his assistance, and it was
the only aid on which he could reckon in that place. He first explored
several of the roads through the forest. They were dreadful, and the
sun never penetrated their gloom. No human being was to be found in
them; not an animal even of any description; it seemed as though the
beasts themselves had a horror of this dreary dwelling.

Philax lived upon the wild fruit he found in it. He passed his days
in the deepest sorrow. The loss of the Princess distracted him, and
sometimes, with his sword, which he had retained, he occupied himself
with carving the name of Imis on the trunks of the trees, which were
not adapted for so tender a practice; but when we are truly in love we
frequently make things serviceable to our passion which appear to be
least favourable for the purpose.

The Prince continued daily to travel through the forest, and he had
been nearly a year on his journey, when one night he heard some
plaintive voices, but could not distinguish any words. Alarming as
these wailing sounds were at such an hour and in a place where the
Prince had never yet met with mortal soul, the desire to be no longer
alone, and to find at least some one as wretched as himself with whom
he could weep over the misfortunes that had befallen them, made him
wait with impatience for morning, when he might seek out the persons
whose voices he had heard. He walked towards that part of the forest
whence he fancied the sounds had proceeded, but hunted all day in vain;
at length, however, towards evening, he discovered, in a spot which
was clear of trees, the ruins of a castle which appeared to have been
of great size and magnificence. He entered a court-yard, the walls
of which were of green marble, and seemed still tolerably perfect.
He found in it nothing but trees of prodigious height, standing
irregularly in various parts of the enclosure. He advanced towards a
spot where he perceived something elevated upon a pedestal of black
marble. It proved to be a confused pile of armour and weapons, heaped
one upon the other: helmets, shields, and swords of an ancient form,
which composed a sort of ill-arranged trophy. He looked for some
inscription which might inform him to whom these arms had formerly
appertained. He found one engraved on the pedestal. Time had nearly
effaced the characters, and it was with much difficulty that he
deciphered these words:--

  TO THE IMMORTAL RECOLLECTION OF THE GLORY OF THE FAIRY CEORA.

                          IT WAS HERE
                     THAT ON THE SAME DAY
                   SHE TRIUMPHED OVER CUPID
              AND PUNISHED HER FAITHLESS LOVERS.

This inscription did not afford Philax all the information he desired;
he therefore would have continued his search through the forest if
night had not overtaken him. He seated himself at the foot of a
cypress, and scarcely had been there a moment, before he heard the same
voices which had attracted his attention the previous evening. He was
not so much surprised at this as at perceiving that it was the trees
themselves which uttered these complaints, just as if they had been
human beings. The Prince arose, drew his sword, and struck with it the
cypress which was nearest to him. He was about to repeat the blow, when
the tree exclaimed, "Hold! hold! Assault not an unhappy Prince who is
no longer in a state to defend himself!" Philax stayed his hand, and
becoming accustomed to this supernatural circumstance, inquired of the
cypress by what miracle it was thus a man and a tree at the same time.
"I am willing to inform you," replied the cypress; "and as, during two
thousand years, this is the first opportunity Fate has afforded me of
relating my misfortunes, I will not lose it. All the trees you behold
in this court-yard were princes, renowned in their time for the rank
they held in the world, and for their valour. The Fairy Ceora reigned
in this country. She was beautiful, but her science rendered her more
famous than her beauty. She therefore made use of other charms to
subject us to her sway. She had become enamoured of the young Oriza, a
prince, whose admirable qualities rendered him worthy of a better fate.
I should premise to you," added the cypress, "it is the oak which you
see beside me." Philax looked at the oak, and heard it breathe a heavy
sigh, drawn from it, no doubt, by the recollection of its misfortune.
"To attract this prince to her Court," continued the cypress, "the
Fairy caused a tournament to be proclaimed. We all hastened to seize
this opportunity of acquiring glory. Oriza was one of the princes who
disputed the prize. It consisted of fairy armour which would render
the wearer invulnerable. Unfortunately, I was the conqueror. Ceora,
irritated that Fate had not favoured her inclinations, resolved to
avenge herself upon us. She enchanted the looking-glasses, with
which a gallery of her castle was entirely lined. Those who saw her
reflected but once in these fatal mirrors, could not resist feeling
for her the most violent passion. It was in this gallery she received
us the day after the tournament. We all saw her in these mirrors,
and she appeared to us so beautiful, that those amongst us who had
hitherto been indifferent to love, ceased to be so from that instant;
and those who were in love with others became as suddenly faithless.
We no longer thought of leaving the Fairy's palace: our only anxiety
was to please her. In vain did state affairs demand our presence in
our own dominions; nothing seemed of consequence to us save the hope
of being beloved by Ceora. Oriza was the only one she favoured, and
the passion of the other princes but gave the Fairy opportunities of
sacrificing them to this lover who was so dear to her, and caused the
fame of her beauty to be spread throughout the world. Love appeared for
some time to have softened the cruel nature of Ceora; but at the end
of four or five years she displayed her former ferocity. She revenged
herself on the kings, her neighbours, for the smallest slight by the
most horrible murders, and abusing the power which her enchantments
gave her over us, she made us the ministers of her cruelties. Oriza
strove in vain to prevent her injustice. She loved him; but she would
not obey him. Having returned one day from fighting and subduing a
giant whom I had challenged by her orders, I caused the arms of the
vanquished to be brought into her presence. She was alone in the
Gallery of Looking-glasses. I laid the giant's spoils at her feet, and
pleaded my passion to her with inconceivable ardour, augmented, no
doubt, by the power of the enchantment by which I was surrounded. But
far from evincing the least gratitude for the success of my combat,
or for the love I felt for her, Ceora treated me with the utmost
contempt; and, retiring into a boudoir, left me alone in the gallery,
in an indescribable state of despair and rage. I remained there some
time, not knowing what resolution to take; for the enchantments of
the Fairy did not permit us to fight with Oriza. Careful of the life
of her lover, the cruel Ceora excited our jealousy, but took from
us the natural desire to revenge ourselves on a fortunate rival. At
length, after having paced the gallery for some time, I remembered that
it was in this place I had first fallen in love with the Fairy, and
exclaimed, 'It is here that I first felt that fatal passion which now
fills me with despair; and you, wretched mirrors, who have so often
represented the unjust Ceora to me, with a beauty which has enslaved my
heart and reason, I will punish you for the crime of offering her to
my view with too great attraction.' At these words, snatching up the
giant's club, which I had brought to present to the Fairy, I dashed the
mirrors to pieces. No sooner were they broken than I felt even greater
hatred for Ceora than I had formerly felt love for her. The princes,
my rivals, felt at the same moment their charms broken, and Oriza
himself was ashamed of the love which the Fairy had for him. Ceora in
vain attempted to retain her lover by her tears; he was insensible
to her grief, and in spite of her cries, we set out all together,
determined to fly from the terrible place, but in passing through the
court-yard, the sky appeared to be on fire; a frightful clap of thunder
was heard, and we found it was impossible for us to move. The Fairy
appeared in the air, riding on a great serpent, and addressing us in
a tone of voice which betrayed her rage,--'Inconstant princes,' said
she, 'I am about to punish you, by a torture which will never end, for
the crime you have committed in breaking my chains, which were too
great an honour for you to bear; and as for you, ungrateful Oriza, I
triumph after all in the love you have felt for me. Content with this
victory, I shall visit you with the same misfortune as your rivals; and
I command,' added she, 'in memory of this adventure, that when the use
of mirrors shall be known to all the world, the breaking of these fatal
glasses shall always be a certain sign of the infidelity of a lover.'
The Fairy disappeared in the air after having pronounced these words.
We were changed into trees; but the cruel Ceora, no doubt with the idea
of increasing our suffering, left us our reason. Time has destroyed the
superb castle, which was the victim of our misfortune; and you are the
only visitor we have seen during the two thousand years that we have
been in this frightful forest."

Philax was about to reply to this speech of the cypress tree, when he
was suddenly transported into a beautiful garden; he there found a
lovely nymph, who approached him with a gracious air, saying, "If you
wish it, Philax, I will allow you in three days to see the Princess
Imis."

The Prince, transported with joy at so unexpected a proposition, threw
himself at her feet to express his gratitude. At that same moment
Pagan was in the air, concealed in a cloud with the Princess Imis: he
had told her a thousand times that Philax was unfaithful, but she had
always refused, on the word of a jealous lover, to believe it. He now
conducted her to this spot, he said, to convince her of the fickleness
of the Prince she so unjustly preferred to him. The Princess saw Philax
throw himself, with an air of extreme delight, at the feet of the
nymph; and was in despair that she could no longer deceive herself on
a point which she feared to believe more than anything in the world.
Pagan had placed her at a distance from the earth, which prevented her
hearing what Philax and the nymph said; and it was by his orders that
the latter had presented herself to him.

Pagan led Imis back to his island, where after having convinced her of
the infidelity of Philax, he found he had only redoubled the grief of
that beautiful Princess without rendering her at all more favourable to
himself.

In despair at finding this pretended infidelity, from which he had
expected so much success, was useless to him, he resolved to be
revenged on the constancy of the lovers: he was not cruel, like the
Fairy Ceora, his ancestress, so he bethought him of a different
punishment to that with which she had visited her unfortunate lovers.
He did not wish to destroy either the Princess, whom he had so tenderly
loved, nor even Philax, whom he had already made suffer so much; so,
confining his revenge to the destruction of a passion which had so
opposed his own, he erected in his island a Crystal Palace, and took
care to put into it everything that would render life agreeable but the
means of leaving it; he shut up in it nymphs and dwarfs to wait on Imis
and her lover; and, when everything was prepared for their reception,
he transported them both there. They at first thought themselves on
the summit of happiness, and blessed Pagan a thousand times for the
mildness of his anger. As for Pagan, although at first he could not
bear to see them together, he expected that this spectacle would one
day be less painful to him. But in the meanwhile, he departed from the
Crystal Palace, after having, with a stroke of his wand, engraved on it
this inscription:--

        Absence, danger, pleasure, pain,
        Were all employ'd, and all in vain,
        Imis' and Philax' hearts to sever.
        Pagan, whose power they dared defy,
        Condemned them, for their constancy,
        To dwell together here for ever!

They say that at the end of some years, Pagan was as much avenged as
he desired to be; and that the beautiful Imis and Philax fulfilled
the prediction of the Fairy of the Mountain, by wishing as fervently
to recover the aigrette of lilies in order to destroy the agreeable
enchantment, as they had formerly desired to preserve it as a safeguard
against the evils which had been foretold would befal them.

    Until that moment a fond pair, so blest,
    Had cherished in their hearts Love's constant fire:
    But Pagan taught them by that fatal test,
    That e'en of bliss the human heart could tire.




THE PRINCE OF LEAVES.


In one of those parts of the world, commonly called Fairyland, on which
poets alone have the right to bestow names, there formerly reigned a
King so renowned for his rare qualities, that he attracted the esteem
and admiration of all the Princes of his time. He had, many years
past, lost his wife, the Queen, who had never brought him a son; but
he had ceased to desire one since the birth of a daughter of such
marvellous beauty, that from the moment she was born he lavished all
his affection and tenderness upon her. She was named Ravissante, by a
Fairy, a near relative of the Queen, who predicted that the wit and the
charms of the young Princess would surpass all that had ever before
been known or even could be expected from her present beauty; but she
added to this agreeable prediction, that the perfect felicity of the
Princess would depend entirely on her heart remaining faithful to its
first love. In such a case, who can feel assured of a happy destiny?
The King, who desired nothing so much as the happiness of Ravissante,
heartily wished that it had been attached to any other condition,--but
we cannot command our own fates. He begged the Fairy, a thousand times,
to bestow on the young Ravissante the gift of constancy, as he had
seen her give to others the gifts of intelligence and of beauty. But
the Fairy, who was sufficiently wise not to deceive him respecting the
extent of her power, frankly informed the King that it did not extend
to the qualities of the heart. She, however, promised to use her utmost
endeavour to impress the young Princess with the sentiments that would
be likely to ensure her happiness. Upon the faith of this promise, the
King confided Ravissante to her care from the time she attained her
fifth year, preferring to deprive himself of the pleasure of seeing her
rather than run any risk of marring her fortune. The Fairy therefore
carried off the little Princess, who was very soon consoled for leaving
the Court of her father, by the delight and novelty of passing through
the air in a brilliant little car.

On the fourth day after her departure the flying car stopped in the
middle of the sea, upon a rock of a prodigious size--it was one entire
shining stone, the colour of which was exactly that of the sky. The
Fairy remarked with pleasure that the young Ravissante was enchanted
with this colour, and she drew from it a happy omen for the future,
as it was the colour which signifies fidelity. Shortly after they had
landed on it, the Fairy touched the rock with a golden wand which she
held in her hand. The rock immediately opened, and Ravissante found
herself with the Fairy, in the most beautiful palace in the world;
the walls were of the same material as the rock, and the same colour
prevailed in all the paintings and furniture, but it was so ingeniously
mixed with gold and precious stones, that far from wearying the
eye, it equally pleased in all. The young Ravissante dwelt in this
agreeable palace, with several beautiful maidens, whom the Fairy had
transported from various countries to attend on and amuse the Princess,
and she passed her infancy in the enjoyment of every pleasure suited
to her age. When she had attained her fourteenth year the Fairy again
consulted the stars, in order to learn precisely when the heart of
Ravissante would be touched with a passion which pleases even more
than it alarms, however formidable it may appear to some; and she read
distinctly in the stars that the fatal time approached when the destiny
of the young Princess would be fulfilled. The Fairy had a nephew who
was indescribably dear to her: he was of the same age as Ravissante,
born on the same day and at the same hour. She had found, in consulting
the stars also for him, that they promised him the same fate as the
Princess--that is to say, perfect happiness, provided he possessed
fidelity which nothing could vanquish. In order to make him both loving
and faithful she had only to let him behold Ravissante. No one could
resist her eyes, and the Fairy hoped that the attentions of the young
Prince would one day touch her heart. He was the son of a King, brother
of the Fairy; he was amiable; and the young Princess not only had never
had a lover, she had not even seen a man since she had lived on the
rock. The Fairy consequently flattered herself that the novelty of the
pleasure of being tenderly beloved would perhaps inspire the Princess
with a feeling of love in return. She therefore transported the Prince,
who was named Ariston, to the same rock which served both as palace
and prison for the beautiful Ravissante. He there found her amusing
herself with the young maidens of her Court, by weaving garlands of
flowers in a forest of blue hyacinths, where they were then walking,
for the Fairy, in bestowing on the rock the power of producing plants
and trees, had limited the colour of them to that of the rock itself.
She had already, some time since, apprised the Princess that Prince
Ariston would soon visit the island, and she had added, in speaking
of the Prince, everything that she thought likely to prejudice her in
his favour; but she deceived herself this time; and on the arrival of
Ariston, she observed nothing of that emotion or surprise which is the
usual presage of a tender passion. As for the Prince, his sentiments
were in perfect accordance with the wishes of the Fairy: he became
passionately in love from the moment he first set eyes on Ravissante;
and it was not possible to see her without adoring her, for never were
grace and beauty so perfectly united as in the person of this amiable
princess. She had the most exquisite complexion, and her dark brown
hair added to its dazzling whiteness; her mouth had infinite charms,
her teeth were more purely white than pearls; her eyes, the most
beautiful in the world, were deep blue, and they were so brilliant, and
at the same time so touching in their expression, that it was hardly
possible to sustain their glances without yielding the heart at once
to the fatal power which love had bestowed on them. She was not very
tall, but perfectly beautiful, and all her movements were peculiarly
graceful. Everything she did and said pleased invariably, and often a
smile or a single word sufficed to prove that the charms of her mind
equalled those of her person.

Such, and a thousand times more amiable than I can paint her, it had
indeed been difficult for Ariston not to have become distractedly in
love; but the Princess received his attentions with indifference, and
did not appear in the least touched by them. The Fairy remarked it, and
felt a grief which was only surpassed by that of the Prince. She had
remarked in the stars that he who was destined to possess Ravissante
would extend his power not only over the earth, but even over the sea.
Therefore her ambition made her wish that her nephew should touch the
heart of the Princess as much as he desired the same effect from his
love. She thought, however, that if the Prince were as learned as she
was in the magic art, he might perhaps find some mode of rendering
himself more attractive in the eyes of Ravissante; but the Fairy, who
had never loved, was ignorant that the art of pleasing is not always
to be discovered, although sought for with the utmost ardour and
eagerness. She taught the Prince, therefore, in a short time, all those
sciences which are known only to the fairies. He had no pleasure in
learning them, nor had he any idea of employing them but with regard
to his passion for Ravissante. He began to make use of them by giving
every day a new fête to the Princess. She admired the wonders produced,
she deigned even sometimes to praise what appeared the most gallant in
these efforts of the Prince to please her; but after all, she received
his devotion and his attentions as the just homage due to her beauty,
and she considered them amply repaid by her condescending to receive
them without anger.

Ariston began to despair of the success of his passion, but he was too
speedily obliged to confess that this very time, which he complained
of so justly, and in which he felt so keenly the hopelessness of his
love, had, notwithstanding, been the most happy period of his life.
A year after his arrival on the island he celebrated the return of
that memorable day on which he had first beheld Ravissante. In the
evening he gave her a fête in the forest of hyacinths. Marvellous music
was heard in every part of the forest without any one being able to
discover from whence the sounds proceeded. All that was sung by these
invisible musicians tenderly expressed the love of Ariston for the
Princess; they concluded their admirable concert by these words, which
were repeated several times:--

    Nor reason nor relentless Fate
    My sufferings can terminate!
    Without one ray of hope to cheer,
    I feel my heart consuming here.
    How great his power Love never knew
    Till from those eyes his arrows flew.

After the music, there appeared suddenly an elegant collation under
a tent of silver gauze, elegantly looped up with ropes of pearls; it
was open on the side towards the sea, which bounded the forest in that
direction; and was illuminated by a great number of chandeliers formed
of brilliants, which emitted an effulgence nearly equal to that of the
sun. It was by this light that the nymphs of the court of Ravissante
pointed out to her an inscription at the entrance of the pavilion,
written in letters of gold upon a ruby of immense magnitude, supported
by twelve little cupids, who flew away as soon as the Princess had
heard this inscription read, which consisted of these lines:--

    Where'er throughout the world those lovely eyes
    May the devoted hearts of men enchain,
    For one as true as in this desert sighs
    Those lovely eyes may search, sweet maid, in vain.
    But through that world your glory to proclaim,
    And every mortal to your altar bring,
    Princess, we haste to bid the trump of Fame
    With praise of beauty so divine to ring.

The fête continued, and Prince Ariston had at least the pleasure
of engrossing the leisure of the Princess, if he could not occupy
her heart. But he was deprived even of this gratification by a
surprising spectacle which appeared far out at sea, and attracted
the curiosity and attention of Ravissante and of all the court. The
object approached, and they distinguished that it was an arbour formed
of interlaced myrtle and laurel branches, closed on all sides, and
propelled with great rapidity by an infinite number of winged fish.
This sight was the more novel to Ravissante as she had never before
seen anything of the colour of this arbour. The Fairy having foreseen
that it would cause some misfortune to her nephew, had absolutely
banished it from her island. The Princess watched for the approach
of the strange object with an impatience which appeared to Ariston a
bad omen for his love. She had not long to wait, for the winged fish
brought the arbour in a few moments to the foot of the rock, and the
attention of the young Princess and of all the Court was redoubled.

The arbour opened, and out of it came a young man of marvellous beauty,
who appeared about sixteen or seventeen years of age. He was clothed
in branches of myrtle, curiously interlaced, with a scarf composed of
various-coloured roses. This handsome stranger experienced as much
astonishment as he occasioned. The beauty of Ravissante did not leave
him at liberty to amuse himself by observing the rest of the splendid
scene, the brilliancy of which had attracted him from a distance. He
approached the Princess with a grace which she had never observed but
in herself. "I am so surprised," said he to her, "at all I find on
these shores, that I have lost the power of expressing my astonishment.
Is it possible," continued he, "that such a goddess (for a goddess you
surely must be) has not temples throughout the universe?" "I am not a
goddess," said Ravissante, colouring; "I am an unfortunate princess
banished from the states of the King, my father, to avoid I know not
what misfortune, which they assure me has been predicted from the
moment of my birth." "You appear to me much more formidable," replied
the handsome stranger, "than those stars which may have some evil
influence on your fate, and over what misfortune could not such perfect
beauty triumph! I feel that it can vanquish everything," he added,
sighing, "since it has conquered in a moment a heart which I had always
flattered myself should remain insensible; but, Madam," continued he,
without giving her time to reply, "I must, against my will, withdraw
from this charming place, where I see you only, and where I have lost
my peace of mind; I will return soon, if Cupid prove favourable to me."
After these words, he re-entered the arbour, and in a few moments he
was lost to sight.

Prince Ariston was so astounded and distressed by this adventure, that
he had not at first the strength to speak; a rival had appeared in a
manner as wonderful as unexpected; this rival had seemed to him only
too charming, and he thought he had observed in the beautiful eyes of
the Princess, whilst the stranger addressed her, a languor which he
had often desired to see, but which till then he had never detected.
Agonized by a despair which he dared not betray, he conducted
Ravissante to the Palace, where she passed part of the night, occupied
by the recollection of her agreeable adventure, and made her nymphs
relate each circumstance over and over again, as though she had not
been herself present. As for Prince Ariston, he went to consult the
Fairy, who, he hoped, might possess some charm to allay the violent
grief under which he laboured; but she had no antidote for jealousy,
and they do say none has ever been discovered to this day. The Prince
and the Fairy, however, redoubled their enchantments to defend the
entrance to the rock from this formidable stranger, whom they took
for a magician. They surrounded the island with frightful monsters,
who occupied a great space on the sea, and who, excited by their own
natural ferocity, and by the power of the spell, seemed to assure
Ariston and the Fairy that it would be an impossibility to take from
them the beautiful Princess whom they so jealously guarded. Ravissante
seemed to feel more vividly the power of the charms of the handsome
stranger by the grief which she experienced at the obstacles opposed
to his return to the island; and she resolved, at all events, to be
revenged on Prince Ariston. She began to hate him, and that alone was
ample vengeance. Ariston was inconsolable at finding he had provoked
the hatred of Ravissante by a passion which it appeared to him should
have produced just the contrary effect. The Princess mourned in secret
the forgetfulness of the stranger: it appeared to her that love should
have ere this made him keep his promise to return. Sometimes, also, she
ceased to desire it, when she remembered the dangers with which Ariston
and the Fairy had surrounded the approach to the island. One day that
she was occupied in these various reflections whilst walking alone on
the sea-shore--for Ariston dared not, as formerly, follow her, and the
Princess refused even to attend the fêtes with which he was accustomed
to entertain her,--she arrived at the same spot which the adventure
with the unknown visitor had rendered so remarkable, and was struck
by the appearance of a tree of extraordinary beauty floating towards
the rock. The colour, which was the same as that of the myrtle arbour
of the stranger, gave her a sensation of joy. The tree approached the
rock, and the monsters attempted to defend the entrance, but a little
breeze agitated the leaves of the tree, and having blown off a few,
and driven them against the monsters, they yielded to these light and
harmless weapons, and even ranged themselves with a show of respect in
a circle around the tree, which approached the rock without further
impediment, and opened, disclosing to view the stranger seated on a
throne of verdure; he rose precipitately at the sight of Ravissante,
and spoke to her with so much eloquence and so much love, that after
she had in a few words acquainted him with her history, she could not
conceal from him that she was touched by his devotion, and rejoiced
at his return. "But," said she, "is it fair that you should know the
sentiments with which you have inspired me before I am informed of the
name even of him who has called them forth?"

"I had no intention of concealing it from you," replied the charming
unknown; "but when near you, one can speak of nothing but you; however,
as you wish to know, I obey you, and beg to acquaint you that I am
called the Prince of Leaves: I am the son of Spring and of a sea nymph,
a relation of Amphitrite, which is the cause of my power extending over
the sea: my empire comprises all parts of the earth which recognise
the influence of Spring; but I chiefly inhabit a happy island where
the gentle season which my father bestows reigns perpetually. There
the air is always pure, the fields ever covered with flowers; the sun
never scorches, but only approaches sufficiently near to illuminate
it; night is banished, and it is therefore called the Island of Day.
It is inhabited by a people as amiable as the climate is agreeable.
It is in this place that I offer you an empire, sweet and calm, and
where my heart above all things will acknowledge your sovereignty. You
must, however, beautiful Princess, consent to be carried off from this
rock, where you are retained in veritable bondage: notwithstanding the
honours they pay you with a view to disguise the real state of the
case." Ravissante could not, however, make up her mind to follow the
Prince of Leaves into his empire, in spite of the fear which she had
of the power of the Fairy, and the suggestions of her love; she hoped
that her perseverance in rejecting the vows of Ariston, would at length
cause him to resolve to conquer his passion, and that the Fairy would
then restore her to her father, from whom the Prince of Leaves might
demand her hand.

  [Illustration: The Prince of Leaves.--P. 152.]

"But I should at least wish," said she to him, "to be able to send
you word of what happens in this island, and I know not how that is
possible, as everything I do is suspected and watched." "I will leave
with you here," said the Prince, "the subjects of a friend of mine,
who is also a prince. They will constantly attend on you, and by them
you can often send me intelligence; but remember, beautiful Princess,
with what impatience I shall wait for it!" After these words, he
approached the tree which had conveyed him, and having touched some of
the leaves, two butterflies appeared, the one white and flame-colour,
the other yellow and light-grey--the most beautiful in the world. As
Ravissante gazed on them, the Prince of Leaves said, smiling, "I see
you are surprised at the appearance of the confidants I give you;
but these butterflies are not merely what they appear to be; it is a
mystery which they will explain if you will permit them to talk to
you." As he spoke, Ravissante perceived in the distance some of her
nymphs, who came to seek her in her solitude, and she begged the Prince
of Leaves to re-embark; he obeyed, notwithstanding the infinite regret
he felt at quitting her, but he did not depart quickly enough to avoid
observation; they informed Ariston and the Fairy of his return to the
island, and from that moment, in order to take away from the beautiful
Ravissante the means, and even the hope of seeing him again, they
erected a tower on the summit of the rock formed of the same stone;
and in order to render it more entirely secure, as the guard of living
monsters had proved insufficient, they caused the tower and rock to be
invisible to all those who should come to seek her, not daring again
to trust to ordinary enchantments. Ravissante was in despair at being
immured in so cruel and impregnable a prison. Prince Ariston had not
concealed from her that he had rendered it invisible; he had even
attempted to make her accept this care for her safety as a proof of
his tender devotion; but Ravissante felt her hatred and contempt for
him increase daily, and he dared no longer enter her presence. The
butterflies, however, had not quitted her, and she often regarded them
with pleasure as having come from the Prince of Leaves. One day that
she was still more sad than usual, and musing, on a terrace at the top
of the tower, the flame-coloured butterfly flew on to one of the vases
filled with flowers, which ornamented the balustrade. "Why," said he,
all of a sudden to the Princess, "do you not send me to the Prince of
Leaves, he will undoubtedly come to your relief?" Ravissante was at
first so astonished at hearing the butterfly speak, although her lover
had prepared her for the novelty, that she was for some minutes unable
to answer; however, the name of the Prince of Leaves assisting to
dissipate her surprise, "I was so astonished," said she at length, "to
hear a butterfly speak like ourselves, that I could not sooner reply
to you. I can well believe that you could go to apprise the Prince of
Leaves of my misfortune, but what can he do?--only distress himself
uselessly. He cannot find me in a place which the cruelty of my enemies
has taken care to render invisible."

"It is less so than you think," replied the yellow butterfly, flying
round the Princess in order to join in the conversation: "a little
while ago, I surveyed your prison, I flew and even swam round it; it
disappears when one is on the water, but when one is elevated in the
air it ceases to be invisible. No doubt the Fairy did not consider that
road so easy as to require the same defence as that by the sea. I was
about to give you this hint," continued the butterfly, "when my brother
broke the silence which we have hitherto preserved." This agreeable
piece of news restored hope to the Princess. "Is it possible," said
she, "that Ariston can have neglected any precaution which could
gratify his cruelty and his love? No doubt his power, like that of the
Fairy, which is unbounded over earth and sea, does not extend to the
air." This was precisely the reason which had prevented the Prince and
the Fairy from rendering the tower and the rock invisible from the
sky. "But," added Ravissante, after some minutes' reflection, "can the
Prince of Leaves have any power in the air?" "No, Madam," replied the
flame-coloured butterfly, "he can do nothing, and your prison would be
invisible to him though he be a demi-god, as it would be to a mortal;
but--" "The Prince will then be as miserable as myself," interrupted
the sorrowful Ravissante, bursting into a flood of tears, which added
to her beauty, and which affected extremely the two butterflies; "and
I feel I shall be more distressed at his sorrows than at my own!
What ought I, then, to do?" continued she, sighing. "Send me off at
once," replied the flame-coloured butterfly, briskly; "I will go and
apprise the Prince of Leaves of your misfortunes, and he will come
to the rescue: although his power does not extend to the air, he has
a prince amongst his friends who can do anything in it, and of whom
he can dispose as of himself--but my brother can inform you of all
this during my absence. Adieu, beautiful Princess," continued the
butterfly, flying over the balustrade; "cease to weep, and count on my
diligence, I will fly as rapidly as your wishes." After these words,
the butterfly was lost in the air; and the Princess felt that charming
and lively sensation of joy which the hope of soon beholding a beloved
one inspires. She returned to her apartment, and the yellow butterfly
followed her; she was extremely impatient to know from what prince her
lover hoped for assistance; to end her doubts, she begged the yellow
butterfly to tell her all that could contribute to augment or flatter
her hopes. She placed him on a little basket of flowers, which she
carried to a table near her, and the butterfly, who considered it an
honour to please her, commenced his recital.

"Near the Island of Day, where the Prince of Leaves reigns, there is
another, smaller but equally agreeable; the ground there is always
covered with flowers, and they affirm that it is a boon granted to our
country by Flora, to immortalize the memory of the happy days when she
came there to find Zephyr: for they contend that it was on our island
that they used to meet, when their love was still new and secret. It
is called the "Island of Butterflies." The inhabitants are not of the
form that you see me under. They are little winged men, very pretty,
very gallant, very amorous, and so volatile that they hardly love
the same thing for even one day. Whilst the golden age reigned on
the earth, Cupid, who at that time flattered himself that the hearts
of all mankind would be ever fond and faithful, feared that by the
facility with which we flew about the world, we might teach mortals
the agreeable art of changing in love, which this god called an error
capable of utterly destroying the happiness of his empire. In order to
interdict all communication between us and the rest of the universe,
he came to our island, touched the ground with one of his arrows,
and rising again upon a brilliant cloud which had borne him thither,
'If again,' said he, to the inhabitants of the island, 'you wish to
traverse the air, like the gods, I have taken sure means of vengeance;
you can no longer, by your dangerous society, trouble the happiness
of my empire.' After these words he disappeared. The threats of Cupid
did not, however, take from the Butterflies the desire for change,
nor even for flying, if it was only for the pleasure of occasionally
quitting the earth. Some of them mounted into the air, and found that
they had the same facility as they possessed before Cupid had forbidden
them to do so; but as soon as they passed the limits of the Island
they were changed into little insects, such as you now behold me, all
of different colours, avenging Cupid having intended to mark by this
variety how much they were given to inconstancy. Surprised at their
metamorphosis, they returned to our island, and as soon as they touched
the ground they were restored to their original form. Since that fatal
time the vengeance of Cupid has always continued amongst us; when we
quit the earth, nothing of our nature, as men, remains, except our
mind and the liberty of speaking like them; but we have never made use
of it out of our island, not choosing to make this act of vengeance
celebrated by publishing it ourselves to the universe, or to alarm
those who, like us, are inclined to inconstancy. We have, however, the
pleasure of seeing, in our travels through the world, that fate has
revenged us on Cupid without our assistance; for Inconstancy reigns
with equal power to his own in the whole extent of his empire. Some
centuries after this change took place in the realm of the butterflies,
the Sun, that seemed to take pleasure in making it bring forth flowers,
was so enchanted with his handiwork, that he fell in love with a rose
of extraordinary beauty; he was tenderly beloved by her, and she
sacrificed to him all the care bestowed on her by the zephyrs. At the
end of some time the rose became of a different form to the rest; the
Sun immediately caused others to blow, resembling her, in order that
she might be less remarked in this quantity of flowers, which then
appeared a new kind of plant. It has since been called 'the rose of
a hundred leaves.' At length, from the Sun and this rose sprung a
demi-god, whom the Sun destined to reign for ever in our island. Until
then we had had no sovereign, but the son of a god who favoured so
constantly our earth was received as our ruler with extreme joy; they
called him the Prince of the Butterflies. It is this Prince, beautiful
Princess, who can assist you in the air, and whom the adventure I am
about to relate has rendered such a fast friend of the Prince of Leaves.

"In a country far removed from that of the butterflies there reigns a
Fairy, who dwells in a very dark cavern: they call her the Fairy of
the Grotto. She is of an immense size; her complexion is a mixture
of blue, green, and yellow. Her face is almost as formidable as her
power, and she is so dreaded by mortals that there is not one bold
enough to approach the country which she inhabits. One day the Prince
of the Butterflies, travelling for his pleasure in the neighbourhood
of his empire, perceived the Fairy, and surprised at this rencontre
he followed her for some time to see what would become of so fearful
a monster. She did not remark that she was observed, for the Prince,
although the offspring of the Sun, had not been able to obtain from
fate the liberty of travelling under any other form than that which
we all took on leaving the kingdom, because he was born since the
time when Cupid had made us feel his vengeance. However, he was not
inconstant, like all his subjects, and Cupid, by way of showing him
a little favour on that account, had permitted him, when he changed
his form, to be of one colour only, and that colour should be the one
which signifies Fidelity. Under this form he followed the Fairy as
far as he pleased, and he saw her enter her dismal abode. Impelled
by curiosity, he flew in after her; but what a sight awaited him at
the bottom of this cavern! He there saw a young lady, more beautiful
and more brilliant than the day, reclining on a bed of turf, and who
appeared in extreme grief. From time to time she dried the tears
which fell from her lovely eyes; her distress and the languor of her
appearance added to her charms. The Prince of the Butterflies remained
so entranced by this spectacle, that he forgot the form under which he
appeared, and only remembered that he was desperately in love, and that
he was burning to say so. He was roused from this sweet reverie by the
awful voice of the Fairy, who spoke to the young lady with frightful
severity. This filled his heart with sorrow and anger, as well as with
despair, at not daring to express either one or the other. The Fairy,
who by a natural restlessness could not remain long in the same place,
went out of the cavern; the Prince then approached the young person
with whom he was so charmed; he flew round her, and wishing to enjoy
the only liberty which his form permitted, he alighted on her hair,
which was the fairest in the world, and at length upon her cheek. He
was dying to tell her how much he was touched with her beauty and her
grief, but by what means could he convince her that he was son of the
Sun, without being able to appear before her in his own form; and how
could he inform her of the vengeance of Cupid, and the inconstancy
so natural to the inhabitants of the island, at the very time that
he wished to persuade her that he would never cease to love her? He
remained several days in the cavern, or in the forest with which it was
surrounded; he could not resolve to quit this beauty that he so adored,
and although he dared not speak to her, he saw her, and that was enough
to make him prefer this hideous abode to the agreeable scenes where
he had the pleasure of reigning, and of being acknowledged the most
beautiful Prince in the world.

"During the time he remained with this young creature he always saw
the Fairy treat her with incredible inhumanity, and he learnt from
their conversation that this beautiful person was the Princess of the
Linnets, whom the Fairy, being a relative, had carried off at a tender
age, in order more easily to usurp her kingdom, which was a little
island situated near to that of the Butterflies. He had heard of the
Princess having been carried away, and that no one knew what had become
of her. This country was called the Land of the Linnets, on account
of the great quantity of those little birds that was found there. The
Prince of the Butterflies pitied sincerely this unfortunate Princess,
and, in the hope of being able to deliver her, he determined at length
to tear himself away from her. He flew to the Island of Day without
resting for a moment; he there found the Prince of Leaves, with whom
he was united in the most tender bond of friendship, and who was about
to pass a part of the year in the Island of Butterflies. He related
his adventure to the Prince, and after discussing every means by which
it would be possible to set the young Princess at liberty, the Prince
of Leaves resolved to go himself into the forest of the Fairy, to
inform the Princess of the Linnets of the violent love which the Prince
of the Butterflies felt for her, and the reason which would always
prevent that unfortunate sovereign from appearing before her under
his proper form, unless she consented to be transported to the Island
of Butterflies. But the Prince of Leaves appeared to his friend too
formidable a rival to be entrusted with the commission; for he feared,
with reason, that the Princess might be more touched by the charms of
so perfect a prince than by the recital of the love entertained for
her by another prince whom she had never seen nor even heard speak.
He deplored the cruelty of his destiny, and sought some other mode of
declaring his love to the Princess, but without success.

"None but a demi-god could approach the dwelling of the Fairy without
feeling immediately the direful effect of her fury. He embarked,
therefore, with the Prince of Leaves, agitated by a jealous fear.
It appeared to him that this Prince could not preserve for a single
moment, on beholding the beautiful Princess, the insensibility on which
he had always piqued himself.

"Cupid, touched at the sad state to which he was reduced, wished at
least to re-assure him on this point, and at the same time triumph over
the insensible heart of the Prince of Leaves. It was by you, beautiful
Princess," continued the Butterfly, "that the God expected to gain this
victory, and you alone are worthy of it.

"It was on the same day that the two princes embarked that they saw
from afar, upon this rock, an illumination so brilliant, that the
Prince of Leaves, impelled by his destiny more than by curiosity,
ordered the winged fish which conducted the arbour of myrtle in
which he travelled, to approach the spot from which the bright light
emanated. You know the remainder of this adventure. The Prince of
Leaves found you in the forest of hyacinths, and left at your feet the
liberty which he had held so dear, and which, till that moment, he
had always preserved. Hurried away by the impatience of the Prince of
the Butterflies, who had suffered nothing but regret at the delay, he
tore himself, with infinite pain, from a spot where his heart and his
wishes would have made him desire to remain for ever. They continued
their voyage, and the Prince of the Butterflies was so delighted to see
that the Prince of Leaves was so deeply in love, and so far from being
likely to become his rival, that he did not doubt of its being a happy
omen, and that he might count on a successful issue to his enterprise.

"They arrived in the forest of the Fairy of the Grotto; they entered
her dreary abode, and Cupid, who had resolved to favour them, caused
them to find the Princess of the Linnets alone and asleep. There was
no time to be lost--the Prince of Leaves carried her off in the myrtle
arbour, whilst the Prince of the Butterflies followed.

"The Fairy returned at this moment; she uttered the most horrible
shrieks at the sight of this abduction; she thought she could prevent
it by her art, and revenge herself on those who had thus dared to
rescue the Princess of the Linnets. But her enchantments were powerless
over the Prince of Leaves, who soon was far away from the dismal shore.
In the meanwhile the Princess awoke, and was agreeably surprised at
finding herself where she was, and at the presence of the Prince of
Leaves. But it was an agreeable surprise, which increased when that
Prince conversed with her, and informed her of the effect of her
beauty, and that she would henceforth, being delivered from the tyranny
of the Fairy, reign in her own empire, and in one also even finer than
her own. The Prince of the Butterflies then spoke of his love with
so much vivacity and tenderness, that the Princess felt excessive
curiosity to see him in his true form, of which she confessed to have
formed a very exalted idea from the time she heard his voice. They
continued to float on, and after some days arrived at the Island of
Butterflies, when the Prince hastened to land, in order to appear at
length in his own person to the Princess. The Princess of Linnets then
sent to inform her subjects in her own island of her adventures: they
flocked to see her, and it was in their presence that she accepted the
heart and empire of the happy Prince of the Butterflies. The Prince of
Leaves, however, left her immediately that he had safely conducted her
to that island, in order to return hither, beautiful Princess, where
his anxiety and his ardent love made him impatient to be."

Ravissante listened with extreme attention to the Butterfly, when
she saw Prince Ariston enter her chamber with such fury in his
countenance, that she dreaded its effects. "Fate threatens me," he
cried, on entering; "and as it is with some great misfortune, it must,
no doubt, be that of losing you; none other would affect my heart, or
be worthy of being so predicted. See, Madam," he continued, addressing
Ravissante, "the colour which the walls of this tower are assuming--it
is a certain sign of approaching misfortune!"

As the misfortunes of Ariston were a happiness to Ravissante, she
looked without distress at that which he pointed out to her notice,
and perceived, indeed, that the blue stones were losing their original
colour, and beginning to turn green. She was delighted to see this,
as she augured from it the certain approach of the Prince of Leaves.
The joy which the unhappy Ariston remarked in her eyes redoubled his
despair. What did he not then say to Ravissante? And rendered sincere
by the excess of his grief, he told her that his love was so great
as not to allow of his ceasing to adore her, although he was sure of
being miserable all his life. "I cannot doubt it," said he to the
Princess, "for the Fates foretold to me as to you--that I should always
be miserable if I were not always faithful to the first impressions
love made on my heart. And by what means could I ever obey this cruel
mandate? After one has seen you, however he may have loved before, he
must forget everything--even the preservation of his own happiness in
loving and seeking to please you. A young princess of the Court of the
King, my father, once appeared to me worthy of my regard. I thought
fully that I should be sighing to return to her after remaining here
for a short time; but the first sight of you subverted all my previous
plans. My reason and my heart were equally inclined for the change, and
I thought nothing impossible to the tender love with which you inspired
me. I flattered myself even that it might overcome fate; but your
austerity, which never relaxed, has taught me that I was deceived, and
that there remains for me no other hope but that of dying speedily for
your sake."

The Prince Ariston finished speaking these words, which made Ravissante
even think him worthy of some pity, when they saw in the air a throne
of foliage, supported by an immense number of butterflies. One
amongst them, which was entirely blue, and by whose colour Ravissante
recognised the son of the Sun, flew to her, and said, "Come, beautiful
Princess, to-day you shall resume your liberty, and make the most
amiable Prince in the world happy."

The butterflies placed the throne near Ravissante; she seated herself
on it, and they bore her away. Ariston, distracted at the loss of the
Princess, in a paroxysm of despair, flung himself into the sea. The
Fairy immediately abandoned the rock which this suicide had rendered
so fatal and melancholy; and to mark her fury, she shivered both it
and the tower into a thousand pieces by a clap of thunder, and the
fragments were carried by the wind and waves to different sea-coasts.
It is of this species of stone that they now make rings, which they
call turquoise. Those which are still called "de la Vieille Roche" are
made of the remains of this shattered rock, and the others are only
stones which resemble them. The remembrance of the misfortune predicted
to Prince Ariston by the change of colour in the walls of the tower has
descended to our time. They say still that these rings become green
when any misfortune is about to happen to the wearers, and that these
misfortunes are generally connected with love affairs.

Whilst the Fairy gave vent to her grief by the destruction of the
island, the Prince of the Butterflies, satisfied at having rendered to
the Prince of Leaves a similar service to that he had received from
him, conducted the beautiful Ravissante, flying before her, to a boat
of rushes, ornamented with garlands of flowers, in which the Prince
of Leaves awaited her with all the impatience which the violence of
his love inspired. It is impossible to convey an idea of the pleasure
he felt at the arrival of the Princess; never were joy and love so
apparent as in the heart and language of this Prince. He sailed
immediately to the Island of Day. The Prince of the Butterflies flew
off to rejoin the amiable Princess of Linnets as speedily as possible.
Ravissante sent two butterflies to the King, her father, to inform him
of her good fortune; the good King thanked the Fates, and set out as
soon as he could for the Island of Day, where the Prince of Leaves and
Ravissante reigned with all imaginable felicity, and were always happy,
because they never ceased to be fond and faithful.

    The lot of Ravissante with envy view--
    Born to be blest could she prove only true.
    How many hapless lovers had succeeded,
    Had constancy been all their idols needed!




THE FORTUNATE PUNISHMENT.


There was once upon a time a King, who fell desperately in love with a
Princess of his Court. As soon as he loved her he told her so. Kings
are more privileged than common lovers. The Princess was not offended
at a love which might place her on the throne, and the King found
her as virtuous as she was charming. He married her: the wedding was
incredibly magnificent; and what was even more remarkable, he became a
husband without ceasing to be a lover. The felicity of this love-match
was only disturbed by the fact of their having no children to succeed
to their happiness and to their kingdom. The King, in order to obtain
at least the comfort of hope on this point, resolved to consult a
fairy, whom he believed to be particularly friendly. She was called
Formidable, although she had not always been so to the King. It is said
even that in the old collections of the time in that country are to be
found ballads which tell a great deal about them. So bold have poets
been in all ages! For the Fairy was very much respected, and appeared
so stern that it was almost impossible to imagine she could ever have
felt the power of love; but where are the hearts that escape? The
King, who had always been very gallant, and who had a great deal of
discernment, was well aware that appearances are often very deceptive.
He had first met with Formidable in a wood where he had been hunting;
she appeared to his eyes under a form so graceful, and with so charming
an air, that the King did not doubt for a moment her desire to please:
it is seldom such charms are displayed without that intention. The
King fell in love with her; the Fairy felt more pleasure in being
loved than in always inspiring terror. This affection lasted several
years; but one day when she reckoned on the heart of her lover as on a
property it was impossible for her to lose, she let the King see her
in her real form: she was no longer young or handsome. She repented
immediately when she perceived by the altered expression of the King's
face that she had been too confident of her power, and discovered that,
however tender hearts may be, they cannot excite or retain love if
they are not united with an agreeable person. The King was ashamed at
finding he had been in love with only an imaginary beauty; he ceased
to love the Fairy, and thenceforth only treated her with attention and
respect. Formidable, with a pride that was natural to her, assumed so
well the appearance of being contented with the esteem of the King,
that she persuaded him she was one of his best friends. She even went
to his wedding, in company with all the other fairies of the country,
who were invited, in order not to give any one reason to fancy from her
refusal that she had any dislike to the marriage.

The King, therefore, counting on the friendship of his old
mistress, went to visit her in her residence, which was a palace of
flame-coloured marble in the midst of a vast forest. The approach to
it was by an avenue of immense length, bordered on both sides by a
hundred flame-coloured lions. Formidable liked only this colour, and
she had therefore by her magic art caused all the animals born in the
forest to be of the same hue. At the end of the avenue was a large
square, wherein a troop of Moors, clothed in flame-colour and gold,
magnificently armed, kept perpetual guard.

The King traversed the forest alone; he knew the way perfectly well; he
even passed through the avenue of lions without danger, for he threw
them, as he entered, some ranunculuses, which the Fairy had formerly
given him to use when passing those terrible beasts. As soon as the
King had thrown them those beautiful flowers, they became gentle and
quiet. He at length reached the Moorish guard, who at first bent their
bows at him, but the King threw them some pomegranate blossoms, which
he had received from the Fairy with the ranunculuses, and the Moors
shot their arrows into the air, and drew themselves up in line to
allow him to pass. He entered the palace of Formidable: she was in a
saloon, seated on a throne of rubies, in the midst of twelve Moorish
women, clothed in flame-coloured gauze and gold. The Fairy's dress was
of the same fashion and colour, but so covered with precious stones
that it shone like the sun; yet it did not make her appear any the
more beautiful. The King looked and listened for a few minutes before
he entered the saloon. Near the Fairy was a quantity of books on a
table of red marble: he saw that she took one and began to instruct
the slaves in those secrets which render fairies so powerful; but
Formidable taught them none but such as would be inimical to the
happiness and comfort of mankind; she took good care to prevent their
learning anything that would contribute to human felicity. The King
felt he hated the Fairy; and entering the apartment, interrupted
the fatal lesson, and surprised Formidable by his appearance; but
recovering herself immediately, she dismissed her Moors, and regarding
the King with an air of pride and anger,--"What seek you here,
inconstant Prince?" she exclaimed. "Wherefore do you come to disturb
by your odious presence the repose I endeavour to obtain in this
seclusion?" The King was quite surprised by so unexpected a mode of
address; and the Fairy, opening one of the books, continued: "I see
clearly what you want. Yes, you shall have a daughter by this Princess
whom you have so unjustly preferred to me, but do not hope to be happy:
it is time for me to be avenged. The daughter that shall be born to you
ere long shall be as much hated by all the world as I formerly loved
you!" The King did everything in his power to soften the anger of the
Fairy; but it was useless; hatred had succeeded to love, and nothing
but love could soften the Fairy's heart; for pity and generosity were
sentiments quite unknown to her. She haughtily commanded the King to
leave the palace, and opening a cage, a flame-coloured parrot flew out.
"Follow this bird," said she to the King, "and bless my clemency for
not delivering you to the fury of my lions and guards."

The bird flew off, and the King followed, and was conducted by a road
hitherto unknown to him, and much shorter than the one he had come by,
into his own kingdom. The Queen, who on his return remarked his extreme
sadness, begged to know the reason so importunately, that the King
at length told her of the cruel prediction of the Fairy, but without
informing her of all that had occurred between them in former times,
in order not to add to the troubles of his beautiful wife. This young
Princess knew that one fairy could not positively prevent anything
predicted by another of her own class, but that she might mitigate the
punishment which that other had inflicted.

"I shall go," said the Queen, "in search of Lumineuse, Sovereign of
the Happy Empire; she is a celebrated fairy who delights in protecting
the unfortunate. She is a relation of mine; she has ever favoured me,
and she even predicted the good fortune to which love would lead me."
The King quite approved of the expedition of the Queen, and hoped much
from it. Her equipage being ready, she set off to seek Lumineuse. The
Fairy bore this name because her beauty was so dazzling that it was
hardly possible to endure the brilliancy of it, and the grandeur of her
soul quite equalled her extreme loveliness. The Queen arrived in a vast
plain, and perceived, at a great distance, a large tower; but although
it was in sight, it was very long before she could approach it, owing
to the many windings in the road. It was built of white marble, and had
no doors, but arched windows of crystal; a beautiful river, of which
the waves appeared of liquid silver, bathed the foot of the tower, and
wound nine times around it. The Queen, with all her Court, arrived on
the bank of the river, at the point where it began its first circle
round the dwelling of the Fairy. The Queen crossed it on a bridge of
white poppies, which the power of Lumineuse had rendered as safe and
as durable as if it had been built of brass. But although it was only
made of flowers, it was nevertheless to be feared, for it had the power
of putting people to sleep for seven years who attempted to pass it
contrary to the wish of the Fairy. The Queen perceived on the other
side of the bridge, six young men, magnificently attired, sleeping on
beds of moss, under tents of foliage. These were princes enamoured of
the Fairy: and as she never would hear love spoken of, she had not
allowed them to pass any farther. The Queen, after having crossed the
bridge, found herself in the first spot which the river left free; it
was occupied by a charming labyrinth of laurestinus and jasmine; there
were none but white, for that was the colour Lumineuse preferred. After
having admired this lovely maze, and easily threaded its paths, which
were only difficult for those the Fairy did not wish should enter her
agreeable dwelling, the Queen again crossed the river by a bridge of
white anemones; it took at this place its second turn, and the space
which it left before it made its third circle was occupied by a forest
of acacias always in full bloom; the roads through it were charming,
and so overshadowed that the rays of the sun never penetrated; a number
of white doves whose plumage might have put the snow to shame were seen
in all directions, and the trees were covered with countless white
canary-birds, that made a delicious concert. Lumineuse, with a touch
of her wand, had taught them the most beautiful and charming songs in
the world. They left this lovely forest by a bridge of tube-roses, and
they then entered a fair plain, wooded with trees laden with such fine
and delicious fruit, that the least of them would have put to shame the
famous gardens of the Hesperides. Every evening the Queen found the
most beautiful tents in the world prepared for her, and a magnificent
repast was served as soon as she arrived, without her seeing any of
the skilful and active officers who prepared it. The Fairy, who had
learnt by her books of the arrival of the Queen, took care that her
journey should not be in the least degree fatiguing to her. The Queen,
leaving this marvellous spot, passed the river again, by a bridge of
white pinks, and entered the park of the Fairy. It was as beautiful as
all the rest. The Fairy sometimes came to hunt there; it was filled
with an infinite number of white stags and does, with other animals of
the same colour; a pack of white greyhounds were scattered over the
park, and lying on the turf with the deer and white rabbits, and other
animals usually wild, but they were not so in this place, the art of
the Fairy had tamed them; and when the dogs chased some beast for the
amusement of Lumineuse, it appeared as if they understood it was only
in play, for while they hunted it in the best style, they never did
the animal any harm. In this place, the river made its fifth circuit
round the dwelling of the Fairy. The Queen, in quitting the park,
crossed the water on a bridge of white jasmine, and found herself in
a charming hamlet. All the little cottages were built of alabaster.
The inhabitants of this pleasant place were subjects of the Fairy,
and tended her flocks; their garments were of silver gauze; they were
crowned with chaplets of flowers; and their crooks were brilliantly
studded with precious stones. All the sheep were of surprising
whiteness; all the shepherdesses were young and handsome; and Lumineuse
loved the colour of white too well to have forgotten to bestow on them
a complexion so beautiful that even the sun itself seemed to have only
helped to render it more dazzling. All the shepherds were amiable, and
the sole fault that could be found with this agreeable country was that
there was not a single brunette to be seen there. The shepherdesses
came to receive the Queen, and presented her with porcelain vases,
filled with the most beautiful flowers in the world. The Queen and all
her Court were charmed with their agreeable journey, and drew from it a
happy presage of obtaining what she desired of the Fairy.

As she was about to leave the hamlet, a young shepherdess advanced
towards the Queen, and presented her with a little white greyhound on
a cushion of white velvet, embroidered with silver and pearls: it was
hardly possible to distinguish the dog from the cushion, the colour
was so exactly the same. "The Fairy Lumineuse, Sovereign of the Happy
Empire," said the young shepherdess to the Queen, "has commanded me to
present you, in her name, with 'Blanc-blanc,' which is the name of this
little greyhound; she has the honour of being beloved by Lumineuse,
whose art has made a marvel of her, and who has commanded her to
conduct you to the tower. You will have nothing to do, Princess, but to
let her go, and follow."

The Queen received the little dog with much pleasure, and was charmed
at the attentions shown her by the Fairy. She caressed Blanc-blanc,
who, after having returned her endearments with much intelligence and
grace, jumped lightly to the ground, and began to frisk before the
Queen, who followed her with all her Court. They arrived at the bank
of the river, which there made its sixth turn, and were surprised to
find no bridge by which to cross it. The Fairy did not wish to be
troubled by the shepherds in her retreat, so there was never a bridge
at that point, except when she desired herself to pass or to receive
any of her friends. The Queen was pondering on this adventure, when
she heard Blanc-blanc bark three times; immediately a light breeze
agitated the trees on the banks of the river, and shook from them such
a great quantity of orange-flowers into the water, that they formed
a bridge of themselves, and the Queen crossed the river by it. She
rewarded Blanc-blanc by caresses, and found herself in an avenue of
myrtles and orange-trees, which having traversed without any feeling
of fatigue, although it was an immense length, she found herself again
on the bank of the river, which made its seventh turn at that spot.
She saw no bridge, but the adventure of the morning re-assured her.
Blanc-blanc struck the ground three times with her little paw, and in
a moment there appeared a bridge of white hyacinths. The Queen crossed
it, and entered a meadow enamelled with flowers. Her beautiful tents
were already pitched in it. She rested a short time, and then resumed
her journey, till she again found herself on the bank of the river.
There was again no means of crossing it; but Blanc-blanc advanced and
drank a little of the beautiful stream, whereupon a bridge of white
roses appeared, and the Queen was thereby enabled to enter the garden
of the Fairy. It was so filled with wonderful flowers, extraordinary
fountains, and statues of superior beauty, that it is impossible to
give an exact description of it. If the Queen had not felt the utmost
impatience to avert the evils with which the cruel Formidable menaced
her, she would have lingered some time in this charming place. All the
Court left it with regret; but they were obliged to follow Blanc-blanc,
who conducted the Queen to the spot where the river made its last
circuit round the dwelling of Lumineuse. The Queen then saw the Palace
of the Fairy quite near to her. Nothing but the river divided her from
it. She gazed on it with pleasure as the goal of her journey, and read
this inscription, written on the tower in letters of gold:--

    Of perfect bliss behold the charming seat,
    By Lumineuse to pleasure dedicated.
    Love only may not enter this retreat,
    Although 'twould seem for Love alone created.

This inscription had been composed in honour of Lumineuse by the most
celebrated fairies of her time. They had wished to leave to posterity
the expression of their friendship and esteem for her. Whilst the Queen
thus amused herself on the banks of the river, Blanc-blanc swam across
the stream, and diving brought up a shell of mother-of-pearl, which she
again let fall into the water. At this signal six beautiful nymphs,
in brilliant attire, opened a large crystal window, and a staircase of
pearls issued from it and slowly approached the Queen. Blanc-blanc ran
up it quickly, till the arrival at the window of the Fairy, and entered
the tower: the Queen followed, but as she ascended, the steps of the
pretty staircase which she had mounted disappeared behind her, and
prevented any one else from following her. She entered the beautiful
tower of Lumineuse, and the window was immediately closed.

All the suite of the Queen were in despair when they lost sight of
her, and found they were unable to follow, for they loved her most
sincerely; their lamentations were heard even in the place where
Lumineuse conversed with the Queen, and in order to re-assure these
unfortunates, the Fairy sent one of her nymphs to conduct them to the
hamlet, where they could await the return of the Queen. The staircase
of pearls re-appeared and revived their hopes; the nymph descended,
and the Queen from the window commanded them to follow and obey the
messenger. The Queen remained with the Fairy, who entertained her
with prodigious magnificence, and with a charm of manner which won
all hearts. The Queen stayed with her for three days, which were not
sufficient, however, for the inspection of all the marvels of the
tower of Lumineuse; it would have taken centuries to see and admire
everything which the Fairy had to show. The fourth day Lumineuse,
after having laden the Queen with presents as elegant as they were
magnificent, said to her, "Beautiful Princess, I am sorry not to be
able to repair the misfortune with which Formidable threatens you; but
that is the fault of destiny, which allows us to bestow good gifts
on those whom we favour, but forbids us to undo or avert the evils
inflicted by other fairies. However, to console you for the misfortune
that has been predicted for you, I promise that before a year be over,
you shall have a daughter so beautiful that all those who behold her
shall be enchanted with her, and I will take care," added the Fairy,
"to cause a Prince to be born who shall be worthy of her hand."

So favourable a prophecy made the Queen forget for a time the hatred of
Formidable, and the misfortune she had threatened her with. Lumineuse
did not tell the Queen the reason of Formidable being her enemy.
Fairies, even when they quarrel amongst themselves, keep jealously
secret everything which would render them contemptible in the eyes of
mortals, and 'tis said they are the only women who have the generosity
not to speak ill of one another. After a thousand thanks on the part
of the Queen, Lumineuse ordered twelve of her nymphs to take charge
of the presents, and to conduct the Queen to the hamlet, she herself
accompanying her as far as the staircase of pearls, which appeared as
soon as they opened the window. When the Queen and nymphs were at the
foot of the stairs they saw a silver car drawn by six white hinds:
their harness was covered with diamonds; a young child, lovely as the
day, drove the car, and the nymphs followed on white horses which might
have vied in beauty with those of the sun. In this elegant equipage the
Queen arrived at the hamlet; she there found all her Court, who were
rejoiced to see her again; the nymphs then took leave of the Queen, and
presented her with the twelve beautiful animals enchanted by the Fairy,
so that they were never tired, informing her that Lumineuse begged she
would offer them in her name to the King. The Queen, overwhelmed by
the kindness of the Fairy, returned to her kingdom; the King met and
received her at the frontier; he was so charmed at her return, and
the agreeable news which she announced on the part of Lumineuse, that
he ordered public rejoicings, the renown of which reached the ear of
Formidable, and thereby redoubled her hate and anger against the King.

Soon after the return of the Queen she found she was about to become
a mother, and felt assured that the beautiful Princess who was to
charm all hearts would be ere long presented to the King by her, for
Lumineuse had promised her birth should take place before the end of
the year, and Formidable had not prescribed the time when her vengeance
should be accomplished; but she had no idea of postponing it long. The
Queen gave birth to two princesses, and did not doubt for a moment
which was the daughter promised to her by Lumineuse, from the eagerness
she felt to embrace the one which first saw the light. She found her
quite worthy of the praises of the Fairy; nothing in the world could
be so beautiful; the King and all who were present hastened to admire
the first-born little Princess, and they entirely forgot the other;
but the Queen, judging by the general neglect, that the prediction of
Formidable was also accomplished, gave orders several times that the
same care should be taken of her as of the eldest.

The waiting-women obeyed with a repugnance which they could not
overcome, and for which the King and Queen dared scarcely blame them,
as they felt the same themselves. Lumineuse arrived with all speed,
upon a cloud, and named the beautiful Princess Aimée, significant of
the destiny which she had promised her. The King paid Lumineuse all the
respect she deserved. She promised the Queen always to protect Aimée,
but she bestowed on her no gift, for she had already given her all in
her power. As for the other Princess, it was in vain that the King gave
her the name of one of his provinces; insensibly every one accustomed
themselves to call her Naimée, in cruel contradistinction to her sister
Aimée. When the two Princesses had attained the age of twelve years,
Formidable desired them to be sent away from the Court, in order,
as she said, to diminish the love and the hate which they inspired.
Lumineuse let Formidable have her way; she was sure that nothing
would prevent the beautiful Aimée from reigning in the kingdom of her
father, and in the hearts of his subjects. She had endowed her with
such charms that no one could see her and have any doubt about it. The
King, in the hope of appeasing the hatred of Formidable, which extended
to all his family, resolved to obey her. He therefore sent the two
young Princesses, with a youthful and agreeable Court, to a marvellous
castle which he possessed in a remote part of his empire: it was called
the Castle of Portraits, and was a place worthy of the learned fairy
who had built it four thousand years before. The gardens and all the
promenades surrounding it were lovely, but the most remarkable thing
was the gallery, of immense length, which contained portraits of all
the princes and princesses of the blood royal of that and all the
neighbouring countries. As soon as they attained their fifteenth year
their portraits were placed here, painted with an art which could be
but feebly imitated by any but a fairy. This custom was to be observed
until the time when the most beautiful princess in all the world should
enter the castle.

This gallery was divided into two vast and magnificent apartments: the
two Princesses occupied them; they had the same masters, the same
education; they taught nothing to the charming Aimée which was not also
taught to her sister; but Formidable came and instilled lessons into
the latter which spoilt all the rest, while Lumineuse, on her side,
rendered Aimée, by her instructions, worthy of the admiration of the
whole universe. After the Princesses had been in this castle, excluded
from the Court for three years, they heard one day a strange noise,
which was followed by the sound of charming music; they looked about
everywhere to find from whence the noise and the concert proceeded,
when they perceived three portraits occupying three places which a
moment before had been vacant. The first represented a lady being
crowned by two Cupids with flowers, one of whom regarded the beautiful
portrait with all the attention it merited, and seemed to have
forgotten to let fly an arrow at it which was fixed in his bent bow;
the other held a little streamer, on which were these verses:--

    Aimée received from Nature at her birth
    Those beauties which immortal are, alone.
    The Graces added loveliness to worth,
    And Venus yielded up to her her zone.

It was not necessary to announce this as the portrait of the beautiful
Aimée; one saw in it all her features depicted with that charming grace
which attracted every heart; she had an exquisitely fair complexion,
the most beautiful colour in the world, a round face, lovely light
hair, blue eyes, which shone with so much brightness that those who had
the pleasure of seeing them thought it useless that Lumineuse should
have bestowed on Aimée a gift which she was sure of possessing from
her own personal beauty: her mouth was charming, her teeth as white
as her skin, and Venus seemed to have given her the power of smiling
like herself. It was this divine portrait which occupied the end of the
gallery. The second was that of Naimée: she was fair, and did not want
beauty; but notwithstanding, like the original, the portrait failed to
please. These words were inscribed beneath it in letters of gold:--

    Naimée, of more than common charms possest,
    Can in no mortal heart a dwelling find.
    Learn that in vain we are with beauty blest,
    Wanting the rarer graces of the mind.

These two portraits occupied all the attention of the two Princesses
and of their juvenile Court, when Aimée, who was not proud of her own
personal charms, and leaving to the others the task of admiring them,
turned her eyes towards the third portrait, which had appeared at the
same time with her own. She found it well worth looking at. It was that
of a young Prince, a thousand times handsomer than Cupid himself; he
had more the air of a god than a mortal; his black hair fell in large
curls on his shoulders, and his eyes bespoke as much intelligence as
his person displayed manly beauty. These words were written underneath
the portrait:--"This is the Prince of the Pleasant Island." Its beauty
surprised everybody, but it affected the lovely Aimée particularly--her
young heart experienced an unknown emotion; and Naimée even, at the
sight of this handsome portrait, found she was not exempt from a
passion which she could not herself inspire. The adventure itself did
not so much astonish any one, for they were accustomed to see wonderful
things in that country. The King and Queen came to the Castle to visit
the Princesses, and had a great many copies made of their portraits,
which they sent to all the neighbouring kingdoms. But Aimée, as soon as
she was alone, carried away by an involuntary impulse, returned to the
gallery of portraits, where that of the Prince of the Pleasant Island
engrossed all her attention, and was every way worthy of it.

Naimée, who had nothing in common with her sister, save an equal
admiration of the portrait of the Prince, also passed nearly all her
time in the gallery. This growing passion so increased the hatred of
Naimée for her sister, that not being able herself to injure her, she
incessantly implored the fairy Formidable to punish her for possessing
superior charms. The cruel Fairy never neglected an opportunity of
doing harm; so, following her own inclination, while yielding to the
solicitations of Naimée, she went in search of the amiable Princess,
who was walking on the bank of the river which flowed at the foot
of the Castle of Portraits: "Go!" said Formidable to her, touching
her with an ebony wand which she carried in her hand,--"Go! Follow
continually the winding of this river, until the day when thou shalt
meet a person who hates thee more than I do, and until that hour
thou shalt not stop to rest in any place in the world!" The Princess,
at this terrible order, began to weep. Such tears! In all the
universe no heart but that of Formidable could be found incapable of
being softened by them. Lumineuse hastened to the assistance of the
beautiful and unhappy Aimée. "Be comforted," said she; "the journey to
which Formidable has condemned thee shall terminate in a delightful
adventure, and during it thou shalt have nothing but pleasure." Aimée,
after this favourable prediction, departed with one single regret,
which was that she should see no more the beautiful portrait of the
Prince of the Pleasant Island; but she dared not express her sorrow
to the Fairy. She therefore set out on her journey, and everything
appeared sensible of her charms. None but the gentlest airs breathed
in the places through which she passed. Everywhere she found nymphs
ready to wait on her with the utmost respect; the meadows were covered
with flowers at her approach; and when the sun became too powerful, the
trees increased their foliage to protect her from its beams.

While the beautiful Princess made so pleasant a journey, Lumineuse
did not merely limit her exertions to neutralizing the evil designs
of Formidable; she sought Naimée, and striking her with an ivory
wand--"Begone!" said she. "Follow in thy turn the banks of the river,
and never shalt thou rest until thou shalt find a person who loves thee
as much as thou deservest to be hated!" Naimée departed, and no one
regretted her absence.

Even Formidable, who was always well pleased when she caused pain,
thought no more of Naimée, and did not condescend to protect her any
longer. The two Princesses thus continued their journey, Naimée with
all the fatigue possible, the most beautiful flowers changing into
thorns in her path; and the lovely Princess, with all the pleasures
which Lumineuse had led her to hope for,--indeed, she found them still
greater than she had expected.

At the close of a beautiful day, at the hour when the sun sank to rest
in the arms of Thetis, Aimée seated herself on the bank of the river.
Immediately an infinite number of flowers, springing up around her,
formed a sort of couch, the charms of which she would have admired
for a much longer time had she not perceived an object on the river
which prevented her from thinking of anything else; it was a little
boat made of amethyst, ornamented with a thousand streamers of the same
colour, inscribed with cyphers and gallant devices. Twelve young men,
clothed in light garments of grey and silver, crowned with garlands
of amaranths, rowed with so much diligence, that the boat was very
soon sufficiently close to the shore to allow Aimée to remark its
various beauties. It was with a feeling of agreeable surprise that
she perceived in every part of it her name and her initials. A moment
after, the Princess recognised her portrait upon a little altar of
topaz, raised in the centre of the boat; and beneath the portrait she
read these words.

 "If this be not love, what is it?"

After the first emotion of surprise and admiration, she feared to see
the stranger land who appeared to be so very gallant. "Everything
informs me of the love of an unknown admirer," said Aimée to herself;
"but I feel that the Prince of the Pleasant Island is alone worthy
to inspire me with that sentiment which I too plainly perceive is
entertained for me by another. Fatal portrait!" she exclaimed; "why did
destiny present it to my view at a time when, so far from defending
myself from its influence, I was even ignorant that it was possible to
love anything more tenderly than flowers."

This reflection was followed by many sighs, and she would have remained
longer buried in her sweet reverie, if the agreeable sound of divers
instruments had not roused her from it. She looked towards the boat
from whence these pleasing sounds proceeded. A man, whose face she
could not see, clothed in a robe of that same magnificent colour which
was displayed in his entire equipage, appeared to be entirely occupied
in the contemplation of her portrait, whilst six beautiful nymphs
formed a charming concert, and accompanied these words, which were sung
by him who did not take his eyes off the picture of the Princess. The
air was Duboulai's:--[10]

    Let all things witness to my passion bear,
    And vaunt the beauties of my matchless fair!
    Aimée more charms than Venus' self displays!
    Ye Nymphs in turn your tuneful voices raise.
    Let all things witness to my passion bear,
    And vaunt the beauties of my matchless fair!

    The Graces gladly quit the Queen of Love
    To follow one whose smile far more they prize.
    To see and serve her is a bliss above
    All that the gods can offer in the skies.
    Aimée more charms, &c.

    One glance from her sweet eyes my heart subdued.
    All yield to her! all to her empire bow!
    And till the moment man her beauty viewed
    None could have loved as all the world must now!
    Aimée more charms, &c.

The sweetness of the music detained the beautiful Aimée on the bank of
the river. When it was finished, the stranger turned his face towards
her, and enabled her to recognise, with as much confusion as pleasure,
the agreeable features of the Prince of the Pleasant Island. What a
surprise, what joy to see this charming Prince, and to find he thought
of nothing but her! One must know how to love as they did in the days
of the Fairies, to understand all that the young Princess felt.

The Prince of the Pleasant Island was equally astonished. He hastened
to land on the fortunate shore which presented to his view the divine
Aimée. She had not the heart to fly from so perfect a prince, though
she upbraided fate a thousand times for her own weakness. On such
occasions fate generally bears the blame.

It is impossible to express what the young lovers said to each other.
Often, indeed, they understood each other without speaking. Lumineuse,
who had conducted to this place both the pretty boat and the steps of
Aimée, appeared all at once to re-assure the timid Princess, who had at
length made up her mind to avoid so charming and dangerous a Prince.
She told them that they were destined to love each other, and to be for
ever united. "But," added the Fairy, "before this happy time arrives,
you must finish the journey commanded by Formidable."

It is impossible to disobey the Fairies; so the beautiful Aimée and
the Prince were satisfied with the pleasure of being together, and
felt that anything which did not separate them was only too delightful.
They continued, therefore, their route, sometimes in the pretty boat,
sometimes wandering on foot through a vast, but beautiful wilderness,
which the river fertilized with its waters. It was in this tranquil
seclusion that the Prince of the Pleasant Island completely lost his
peace of mind. He informed the beautiful Princess of all he had felt
for her since the happy day when her divine portrait had been brought
to his Court, and that one morning as he was walking on the banks of
the river, and dreaming of her, Lumineuse had appeared, and, showing
him the amethyst boat, commanded him to embark in it, promising him
success in his voyage and a favourable issue to his love. Whilst the
Prince and the beautiful Aimée obeyed the orders of Formidable, their
affection increased each day. They became so happy, that they dreaded
arriving at the end of their journey, for fear of being occupied with
anything else but their love. Naimée, meanwhile, also continued her
painful progress.

The course of the river which the two Princesses followed conducted
them insensibly to the Pleasant Island, and they arrived there exactly
at the same moment. Lumineuse did not fail to be present also. She
informed Aimée that the revenge of Formidable was accomplished,
because, in meeting her sister, she had found the only person in the
world who could hate her. "And the journey of Naimée is also finished,
then," said the beautiful Princess, "for nothing has been able to
diminish my regard for her." She then begged the Fairy to mitigate, if
possible, the sad fate of her sister; but this favour was useless to
Naimée. The moment she saw the Prince of the Pleasant Island, whom she
recognised easily as the original of the exquisite portrait which had
touched her heart, and heard him tell Lumineuse that the time of his
marriage with Aimée approached, she threw herself into that river, the
course of which she had followed for twelve months with so much pain,
yet without having resorted to self-destruction; but the woes of love
affect us more deeply than any other misfortunes.

Lumineuse, who saw the Princess plunge into the water, changed her
into a little animal, which evinces still, by its manner of walking,
the contrariness of the unhappy Naimée. Her fate followed her even
after death, for she was not regretted. It cost Aimée, however, a few
tears; but what troubles could not be consoled by the Prince of the
Pleasant Island? She was so engrossed by his affection, that she cared
but little for the fêtes which they gave to celebrate her arrival in
the kingdom, and the Prince himself took but a trifling share in them.
When one is really in love, there is no true pleasure but that of being
loved in return.

The King and Queen, apprised by Lumineuse of what had occurred,
hastened to rejoin their amiable daughter; and in their presence the
generous Fairy declared that the lovely Aimée had had the honour of
putting an end to the adventure of the Castle of Portraits, because
nothing had ever appeared so beautiful as herself in all the world.

The love of the Prince of the Pleasant Island was too violent to endure
delay, so he begged the King and Queen to consent to the fulfilment of
his happiness. Lumineuse herself honoured with her presence a day so
fair and so much desired. The nuptials were celebrated with all the
magnificence which might be expected from fairies and kings; but happy
as was the day, I will not attempt a description of it, for, however
agreeable to the lovers themselves, a wedding is almost always a dull
affair to the general company.

    While Love in turn upon the tender strings
    Of human hearts with hope and fear can play,
    Lovers and poets have a thousand things,
    More or less sweet and eloquent, to say.
    But soon as entered Hymen's happy state
    Apollo and the Muses all seem dumb.
    Of author and of husband 'tis the fate
    To fail in an Epithalamium!


FOOTNOTES:

[10] A Michel Duboulay, or Duboulai, was the author of two
operas, entitled, _Zephyr et Flore_ and _Orphée_; but the music of
these is said to have been composed by Lulli.




MADEMOISELLE DE LA FORCE.




FAIRER THAN A FAIRY.


There was once upon a time, in Europe, a King, who having already
several children by a princess whom he had married, took it into his
head to travel from one end of his kingdom to the other. He passed
his time in visiting one province after another very pleasantly; but
while he was staying in a beautiful castle at the extremity of his
dominions, the Queen, his wife, was brought to bed there of a daughter,
who appeared so exceedingly lovely at the moment of her birth, that the
courtiers, either on account of the child's beauty, or to ingratiate
themselves with the parents, named her "Fairer than a Fairy;" and it
will be seen how well she merited so illustrious a title. The Queen
had scarcely recovered, when she was obliged to follow the King, her
husband, who had departed in haste to defend a distant province which
his enemies had invaded.

Little Fairer than a Fairy was left behind with her governess and the
ladies who attended on her; they brought her up with the utmost care,
and as her father was involved in a long and cruel war, she had plenty
of time during his absence to increase in stature and beauty. That
beauty rendered her famous in all the surrounding countries; nothing
else was spoken of, and at twelve years old she might more easily be
taken for a divinity than for a mortal. One of her brothers came to see
her during a truce, and conceived the most perfect affection for her.

Meanwhile, however, the fame of her beauty and the name she bore so
irritated the fairies against her, that there was nothing they did not
think of to revenge themselves on her, for the presumption implied by
such a title, and to destroy a beauty of which they were so jealous.

The Queen of the Fairies was not one of those good fairies who are
the protectors of virtue, and who have no pleasure but in doing good.
Many centuries having elapsed since she had attained royalty by her
profound learning and art, her great age had caused her to dwindle in
stature, and she was now only called by the nickname of Nabote. Nabote
accordingly summoned a council, and made known to them her resolution
to avenge, not only the beauties of her own court, but those of the
entire world; that she had determined to go and see for herself, and
carry off this paragon whose reputation was so injurious to their
charms. It was no sooner said than done. She set out, and, clothed in a
very plain garb, transported herself to the castle which contained this
marvellous creature. She soon made herself at home in it, and induced
by her cunning the ladies of the Princess to receive her amongst them.
But Nabote was struck with astonishment when, after having carefully
examined the castle, she discovered by means of her art that it had
been constructed by a great magician, and that he had endowed it with
a virtue by the power of which no one could leave its walls or the
surrounding pleasure-grounds but of their own free will, and that
it was not possible to use any sort of enchantment against those
persons who inhabited it. This secret was not unknown to the governess
of Fairer than a Fairy, who, well aware of the invaluable treasure
committed to her charge, still felt no alarm on her account, knowing
that no one in the world could take from her this young princess,
so long as she should not go outside the castle or the gardens. She
had expressly forbidden her to do so, and Fairer, who had already a
large share of discretion, had never failed in taking this precaution.
A thousand lovers had made fruitless efforts to carry her off; but
knowing herself secure within those limits, she did not fear their
violence.

Nabote did not require much time to insinuate herself into her good
graces; she taught her to do beautiful kinds of work, and rendered her
lessons agreeable by recounting pleasant stories. She neglected nothing
which could divert her, and naturally pleased her so much, that at
length one was never seen without the other.

Amidst all her attentions, however, Nabote was not less occupied with
her schemes of revenge; she sought for an opportunity of inducing
Fairer than a Fairy, by some cunning pretence, only to put her foot
over the threshold of one of the castle gates. She was always prepared
to pounce on and fly away with her. One day that she had led her into
the garden, and the young maidens of her Court, having gathered some
flowers, had crowned with them the beautiful head of Fairer than a
Fairy, Nabote opened a little door which led into the fields, and
passing out at it, played an hundred antics, which caused the Princess
and the young folks who surrounded her to laugh heartily. All at once
the wicked Nabote pretended to be taken ill, and the next minute she
fell down, as if swooning away. Some of the young maidens ran to assist
her, and Fairer flew also to her side. But hardly had the unhappy child
passed the fatal gate than Nabote sprang up, seized her with a powerful
arm, and making a circle with her wand, a thick black fog arose, which
dispersing again almost immediately, the ground was seen to open
and two moles emerged, with wings formed of rose-leaves, drawing an
ebony car, and Nabote placing herself in it with Fairer than a Fairy,
it ascended into the air, and cleaving it with incredible velocity,
disappeared entirely from the sight of the young maidens, who by their
cries and tears soon announced to all the castle the loss they had
sustained.

Fairer than a Fairy only recovered from her first astonishment to
fall into another still more fearful; the rapidity with which the car
passed through the air had so bewildered her that she almost lost
consciousness; at length, reviving a little, she cast down her eyes.
What was her alarm to find nothing beneath her but the vast extent of
the shoreless ocean. She uttered a piercing cry, turned round, and
seeing near her her dear Nabote, she embraced her tenderly and held her
close in her arms as one naturally would to re-assure oneself. But the
Fairy repulsed her rudely:--"Off! audacious child," said she. "Behold
in me your mortal foe. I am the Queen of the Fairies, and you are about
to pay to me the penalty of your insolence in assuming the proud name
which you bear."

Fairer, trembling at these words more than if a thunderbolt had fallen
at her feet, felt greater alarm at them than at the dreadful road she
was travelling. At length, however, the car alighted in the midst
of the magnificent court-yard of the most superb palace that ever
was seen. The sight of so beautiful a palace somewhat re-assured the
timid Princess, especially when she descended from the car, and she
saw an hundred young beauties, who came with much deference to pay
their respects to the Fairy. So charming a residence did not appear to
announce misfortune to her. She had also one consolation which does
not fail to flatter one in similar situations: she remarked that all
those beautiful persons were struck with admiration on beholding her,
and she heard a confused murmur of praise and envy which gratified her
marvellously.

But how speedily was this little feeling of vanity extinguished! Nabote
imperiously commanded them to strip Fairer of her beautiful clothes,
thinking thereby to take from her a portion of her charms. They pulled
them off, accordingly, but only to increase the fury of Nabote, for
what beauties were then disclosed to view, and to what shame did they
put all the fairies in the world! They re-clothed her in old shabby
garments. But in this state, one would have said her natural and
simple loveliness was determined to show how independent it was of the
assistance of the most costly ornaments; never did she appear more
charming! Nabote then ordered them to conduct her to the place which
she had prepared for her, and to set her her task. Two fairies took her
and made her pass through the most beautiful and sumptuous apartments
that could possibly be seen. Fairer noticed them, in spite of her
misery, and said to herself, "Whatever torments they may prepare for
me, my heart tells me I shall not always be miserable in this beautiful
palace."

They made her descend a large staircase of black marble, which had more
than a thousand steps: she thought she was going into the bowels of
the earth, or rather, that they were conducting her into the infernal
regions. At length they entered a small cabinet, wainscoted with ebony,
where they told her she would have to sleep on a little straw, and that
there was an ounce of bread with a cup of water for her supper. From
thence they made her pass into a great gallery, the walls of which
were entirely composed of black marble, and which had no light but
that afforded by five lamps of jet, which threw a sombre glare over
the place, more alarming than cheering. These gloomy walls were hung
with cobwebs from top to bottom, and such was their peculiarity, that
the more they were swept away the more they multiplied. The two fairies
told the Princess that this gallery must be swept clean by break of
day, or that she would be made to suffer the most frightful torments,
and after placing a ladder, and giving her a broom of rushes, they bade
her set to work, and left her.

Fairer than a Fairy sighed, and not knowing the peculiarity of those
cobwebs, courageously resolved, notwithstanding the great length of
the gallery, to execute the task imposed on her. She took her broom,
and mounted the ladder nimbly, but, O Heavens! what was her surprise
when, as she endeavoured to sweep the marble and clear off the cobwebs,
she found they increased in proportion to her exertions! She fatigued
herself by persevering for some time, but perceiving sorrowfully, at
length, that it was all in vain, she threw down her broom, descended
the ladder, and seating herself on the last step of it, began to weep
bitterly, and to foresee the extent of her misfortune. Her sobs came
at length so fast that she could no longer support herself, when,
raising her head a little, her eyes were dazzled by a brilliant light.
The gallery was in an instant illuminated from end to end, and she saw
kneeling before her a youth so beautiful and charming, that at the
first glance she took him for Cupid, but she remembered that Love is
always painted naked, and this handsome youth was dressed in a suit
of clothes covered with jewels. She was not sure, also, that all the
light she perceived did not proceed from his eyes, so beautiful and
brilliant did they appear to her. This young man continued to gaze upon
her, still kneeling. She felt inclined to kneel too. "Who art thou?"
she exclaimed, in amazement. "Art thou a God? Art thou Love?" "I am not
a God," he replied, "but I have more love in me than is to be found in
heaven or earth beside. I am Phratis, son of the Queen of the Fairies,
who loves you and will aid you." Then, taking up the broom which she
had thrown down, he touched all the cobwebs, which immediately turned
to cloth-of-gold of marvellous workmanship, the lamps becoming bright
and shining; Phratis then, giving a golden key to the Princess, said,
"In the principal panel of your cell you will find a lock; open it
gently. Adieu, I must retire for fear of being suspected: go to rest;
you will find all that is necessary for your repose." Then placing one
knee on the ground, he respectfully kissed her hand and disappeared.

Fairer, more surprised at this adventure than at anything else which
had happened to her during the day, re-entered her little apartment,
and looked about for the lock of which he had spoken, when, on
approaching the wainscot, she heard the most gentle voice in the
world apparently deploring some misfortune, and she imagined it must
proceed from some wretched being persecuted as she was. She listened
attentively. "Alas! what shall I do?" said the voice. "They bid me
change this bushel of acorns into oriental pearls!" Fairer than a
Fairy, less astonished than she would have been two hours before,
struck two or three times on the panel, and said pretty loudly, "If
they impose hard tasks in this place, miracles are at the same time
performed here--therefore, hope! But tell me, I pray, who you are, and
I will tell you who I am." "It is more agreeable to me to satisfy your
curiosity than to continue my employment," replied the other person.
"I am the daughter of a King; they say I was born charming, but the
fairies did not assist at my birth, and you know they are cruel to
those whom they have not taken under their protection directly they
come into the world." "Ah! I know it too well," replied Fairer; "I
am handsome, like yourself, the daughter of a King, and unfortunate,
because I am agreeable without the assistance of their gifts." "We
are, then, companions in misfortune," returned the other. "But are
you in love?" "Not far from it," said Fairer, in a low voice; "but
continue your story," said she aloud, "and do not question me more."
"I was considered," continued the other, "the most charming creature
that had ever existed, and everybody loved me and wished to possess
me: they called me Désirs; my will was law, and I was treasured in
all hearts. A young prince, the most enthusiastic of my adorers,
abandoned everything for me. My encouragement of his hopes transported
him with delight. We were about to be united for ever, when the
fairies, jealous at beholding me the object of universal admiration,
and detesting the sight of attractions which they had not bestowed,
carried me off one day in the midst of my triumphs, and consigned me
to this horrid place. They have threatened that they will strangle me
to-morrow morning if I have not performed a preposterous task which
they have imposed upon me. Now, tell me quickly, who are you?" "I have
told you all," replied Fairer, "but my name. They call me Fairer than
a Fairy." "You must, then, be very beautiful," replied the Princess
Désirs; "I should like excessively to see you." "I am quite as anxious
to see you," replied Fairer. "Is there a door hereabouts, for I have
a little key which perhaps may be of use to you." Looking narrowly
round, she discovered one which she was able to open, and pushing it,
the two Princesses met face to face, and were equally surprised at the
marvellous beauty of each other.

After embracing affectionately, and saying many civil things to
one another, Fairer began to laugh at seeing the Princess Désirs
continually rubbing her acorns with a little white stone, as she had
been ordered to do. She told her of the task which they had imposed
upon her, and how miraculously she had been assisted by a charming
unknown being! "But who can it be?" said the Princess Désirs. "I think
it is a man," replied Fairer. "A man!" cried Désirs. "You blush--you
love him!" "No, not yet," replied Fairer; "but he has told me he loves
me; and if he loves me as he says, he shall assist you." Hardly had
she uttered these words, when the bushel measure began to shake, and
agitating the acorns, as the oak on which they had grown might have
done, they were instantly changed into the most beautiful pear-shaped
pearls of the first water. It was one of these which Cleopatra
dissolved in wine at the costly banquet she made for Mark Antony.

The two Princesses were delighted at the exchange, and Fairer than a
Fairy, who began to be accustomed to wonders, leading Désirs by the
hand, returned into her own chamber, and finding the panel containing
the lock of which the stranger had spoken, she opened it with her
golden key, and entered an apartment, the magnificence of which both
surprised and affected her, as she saw in everything it contained the
attention of her lover. It was strewn with the most beautiful flowers,
and exhaled a divine perfume. At one end of this charming room there
was a table covered with all that could gratify the most refined taste,
and two fountains of liqueurs which flowed into basins of porphyry.
The young Princesses seated themselves in two ivory chairs, enriched
with emeralds; they ate with a good appetite, and when they had supped,
the table disappeared, and in its place arose a delicious bath, into
which they stepped together. At a few paces from them they observed
a superb toilet-table, and large baskets of gold wire full of linen
of such exquisite purity that it made them long to make use of it. A
bed of singular form and extraordinary richness, occupied the further
end of this marvellous chamber, which was lined with orange-trees in
golden boxes studded with rubies, while rows of cornelian columns
sustained the sumptuous roof, divided only by immense crystal mirrors
which reached from the ground to the ceiling. Several consoles, of rare
materials, supported vases of precious stones, filled with all sorts of
flowers.

The Princess Désirs admired the good fortune of her companion,
and, turning to her, observed, "Your lover is indeed gallant; he
can do much, and he will do everything for you; your happiness is
extraordinary." A clock striking midnight repeated at each stroke the
name of Phratis. Fairer than a Fairy coloured, and threw herself on the
couch. She trusted to repose, but her sleep was troubled by the image
of Phratis.

The next morning there was great astonishment in the Court of
the Fairies at seeing the gallery so richly decorated, and the
bushel-measure full of beautiful pearls. They had hoped to punish the
young Princesses: their cruelty was disappointed. They found each
alone in her little chamber. After consulting together again, in order
to devise some tasks which could not possibly be accomplished, they
told Désirs to go to the sea-shore and write on the sand, with express
orders to take care that what she wrote there could never be effaced.
And they commanded Fairer to go to the foot of Mount Adventurous, to
fly to the top, and bring them a vase full of the water of immortality.
For this purpose they gave her a quantity of feathers and wax, in
hopes that, by making wings for herself, she might perish like another
Icarus. Désirs and Fairer looked at each other on hearing these
dreadful commands, and, embracing tenderly, they separated, as if
taking an eternal farewell. The fairies conducted one to the sea-shore
and the other to the foot of Mount Adventurous.

When Fairer was left by herself she took the feathers and wax, and
made some vain attempts to form wings with them. After having worked
for some time most ineffectually, her thoughts reverted to Phratis. "If
you loved me," said she, "you would come to my assistance." Hardly had
she finished the last word when she saw him stand before her, looking
a thousand times more beautiful than on the preceding night. The full
light of day was an advantage to him. "Do you doubt my affection?" said
he. "Is anything difficult to him who loves you?" He then requested
her to take off some portion of her dress, and having kissed her hand
as a recompense, he transformed himself suddenly to an eagle. She was
rather sorry to see so charming a person thus metamorphosed, but,
placing himself at her feet, he extended his wings, and made her easily
comprehend his design. Reclining upon him, she encircled his proud neck
with her beautiful arms, and he rose with her gently into the air.
It would be difficult to say which was the most gratified--she, at
escaping death in the execution of the order given her, or he, at being
permitted to bear such a precious burden.

He carried her gently to the summit of the mountain, where she heard
an harmonious concert warbled by a thousand birds that came to render
homage to the divine bird which bore her. The top of this mountain was
a flowery plain, surrounded by fine cedars, in the midst of which was a
little stream, whose silvery waves rolled over golden sands strewn with
brilliant diamonds. Fairer than a Fairy knelt down, and first of all
took some of this precious water in her hand, and drank it. After this
she filled her vase, and, turning towards her eagle, said, "Ah, how I
wish that Désirs had some of this water!" Scarcely had she spoken these
words than the Eagle flew down, took one of the slippers of Fairer,
and returning with it, filled it with water, and carried it to the
sea-shore, where the Princess Désirs was occupied in fruitless attempts
to write indelibly on the sand.

The Eagle returned to Fairer, and resumed his beautiful burden. "Alas!"
said she, "what is Désirs doing? Take me to her." He obeyed. They found
her still writing, and as fast as she wrote, a wave came and effaced
what she had written. "What cruelty," said the Princess to Fairer,
"to command what it is impossible to accomplish! I imagine, from the
strange mode of your conveyance, that you have succeeded." Fairer
alighted, and, moved by the misfortune of her companion, she turned
towards her lover, and thus addressed him, "Give me proof of your
omnipotence." "Or rather of my love," interrupted the Prince, resuming
his proper form. Désirs, observing the beauty and grace of his person,
cast on him a look of surprise and delight. Fairer coloured, and by
a movement over which she had no control, placed herself before him
so as to hide him from her companion. "Do as you are told," continued
she, with a charming air of uneasiness. Phratis knew his happiness, and
wishing to terminate as speedily as possible her trouble, "Read," said
he, and disappeared swifter than a flash of lightning.

At the same instant a wave broke at the feet of Fairer, and in retiring
left behind a brazen tablet, as firmly fixed in the sand as if it had
been there from all eternity, and would remain immovable to the end of
the world. As she looked at it, she perceived letters forming on it,
deeply engraved, which composed these lines:--

    The vows of common love in sand are traced,
    And, even 'graved in brass, may be effaced;
    But those which are inspired by your bright eyes,
    In starry words are written in the skies.
    Nought can destroy those characters divine,
    Eternal as the heavens in which they shine.

"I understand," cried Désirs: "he who loves you, must always love!
How well your charming swain expresses his feelings." She then
embraced Fairer than a Fairy, who soon, in her arms, recovered from
the confusion occasioned by the little feeling of jealousy she had
experienced, and confessed it to her friend, who accused her of it;
and both, confirmed in their friendship, abandoned themselves to the
pleasure of an agreeable and affectionate conversation.

Queen Nabote sent messengers to the foot of the mountain to find what
was become of Fairer than a Fairy. They found the scattered feathers,
and a part of her clothes, and consequently believed she had been
dashed to pieces, as they desired.

Full of this idea, the fairies ran to the sea-shore; they exclaimed at
the sight of the brazen tablet, and were overwhelmed at perceiving the
two Princesses calmly seated in conversation on a jutting piece of
rock. They called to them. Fairer presented her vase full of the water
of immortality, and laughed in secret with Désirs at the fury of the
fairies.

The Queen was not to be jested with. She knew that a power as great
as her own must have assisted them, and her rage increased to such a
pitch, that without hesitating an instant, she determined on effecting
their ruin by a final and most cruel trial.

Désirs was condemned to go on the morrow to the Fair of Time, to fetch
the Rouge of Youth, and Fairer than a Fairy to proceed to the Wood of
Wonders, and capture the Hind with Silver Feet.

The Princess Désirs was conducted to a vast plain, at the end of which
was an immense building, divided into galleries full of shops so superb
that no comparison could be found for them but in the recollections of
the magnificent entertainments at Marly.[11] These shops were kept by
young and agreeable fairies, assisted by their favoured lovers.

As soon as Désirs appeared, her charms fascinated everybody. She took
possession of all hearts. In the first shops she entered she excited
much commiseration by asking for the Rouge of Youth. None would tell
her where to find it, because, when it was not a fairy who came in
search of it, it was a sure sign of torment to the person who was
charged with this dangerous commission. The good fairies told Désirs
to return, and to inquire no further for what she sought. She was so
beautiful that they ran before her wherever she went, in order to gaze
at her. Her ill-luck, however, led her to the shop of a wicked fairy.
Hardly had she asked for the Rouge of Youth, on the part of the Queen
of the Fairies, than, darting a terrible glance at her, she told her
that she had it, and that she would give it her the next morning, and
ordered her to enter a room and wait till it was prepared for her. They
led her into a dark and pestilential place, where she could not see her
hand before her. She was overcome with terror. "Ah!" she exclaimed,
"charming lover of Fairer than a Fairy, haste to my rescue, or I am
lost!"

But he was deaf to her appeal, or unable to act as he had done in
other places. Désirs tormented herself half the night and slept the
remainder, when she was awakened by a good-looking girl, who brought
her a little food, telling her that it was sent her by the favourite
of the Fairy, her mistress, who was resolved to assist her, and that
it would be fortunate for her if such were the case, because the Fairy
had sent for an evil spirit, who, by breathing on her face, would make
her hideous, and in that frightful state she would be ignominiously
sent back to the Queen of the Fairies, who, with all her Court, would
triumph in her misfortunes.

The Princess Désirs felt frightened to death at this threat of losing
in a moment all her beauty, and wished rather to die outright. Her
agony was horrible; she groped about her dark prison in vain hope of
discovering some mode of escape, when some one took her by the arm,
and she felt in her heart a sensation of pleasure. She was gently led
towards a spot where she began to perceive a little light, and when
her eyes became accustomed to it, she was struck by the appearance
of what was to her the most charming object in the world, for she
recognised that dear Prince who loved her so truly, and from whom
they had separated her on the eve of her wedding. Her transport, her
delight, was extreme. "Is it you?" she exclaimed a hundred times.
At length, when fully persuaded of the fact, and forgetting all her
own troubles--"But are you the favourite of this wretched Fairy?"
she continued. "Is it with this fine title that I again behold you."
"Undoubtedly," replied he; "and we shall owe to it the end of our
troubles, and the certainty of our happiness."

He then recounted to her how, in despair at her being carried off, he
had gone to seek a wise old man, who had informed him where she was,
and assured him that he would never recover her but in the Kingdom
of the Fairies; that he had furnished him with the means of finding
it, but that he had been arrested in his pursuit of her by this cruel
Fairy, who had fallen in love with him; that, following the advice of
the sage, he had dissembled, and by his docility had obtained such an
influence over her, that he had the care of all her treasure, and was
the minister of all her power; that she had just departed on a journey
of six thousand leagues; that she would not return for twelve days;
and that, therefore, they should lose no time in escaping; that he
was going into his cabinet to fetch a part of the gem of the ring of
Gyges[12]; that she should put it on, and thereby becoming invisible,
she could pass anywhere: as for himself, he could show himself as he
pleased. "Do not forget," said she, "the Rouge of Youth; I wish to put
some on, and to give some to one of my companions."

The Prince smiled. "Whither shall we go?" continued she. "To the Queen
of the Fairies," he replied. "No, that will never do," she exclaimed;
"we shall perish there!" "The sage who counselled me," pursued he,
"told me to lead you back to the place from whence you came last, if
I wished to be assured of happiness: he has never yet deceived me in
anything whatever." "Well, then, so be it," said Désirs; "we will go
there."

The Prince brought her a valuable box, in which was the Rouge of
Youth; and with the hope of making herself appear more beautiful still
in the eyes of her lover, she rubbed some hastily all over her face,
forgetting that she was invisible by means of the gem which he had
given her. She took him by the arm. They traversed in this manner the
whole of the Fair, and were soon close to the palace of the Queen.
There the Prince resumed the gem of Gyges. The beautiful Désirs became
visible, and he became invisible, to the great regret of the Princess,
whom he took by the arm in his turn, and presented her before Nabote
and her Court. All the fairies looked at each other in excessive
astonishment at seeing Désirs return with the Rouge of Youth, and the
Queen, frowning awfully, desired them to guard her strictly. "Our arts
are vain," said she. "We must put her to death, without trying any more
experiments."

The sentence was pronounced. Désirs trembled with fear; her lover
re-assured her as much as he could.

But we must return to Fairer than a Fairy. They had conducted her to
the Wood of Wonders, and here is the reason why they had condemned her
to chase the Silver-footed Hind:--

Once upon a time there had been a Queen of the Fairies who had
succeeded in due course to that grand title; she was beautiful, good,
and wise. She had had several lovers, whose affections and attentions
had, however, been lost upon her. Entirely occupied in protecting
virtue, she found no amusement in listening to the sighs of her
adorers. There was one whom her coldness rendered the most unhappy,
because he loved her better than any of the others.

One day, seeing that he could not move her to pity him, he protested,
in his despair, that he would kill himself. She was not affected even
at this threat, considering it merely as one of those extravagances
in which lovers sometimes indulge, but which never have any serious
result. However, some time after, he really did throw himself into the
sea.

A sage, who had brought up this young man, complained to the supreme
authorities, and the insensible Fairy was condemned to do penance for
her severity in the form of a hind, for the term of one hundred years,
unless an accomplished beauty could be found, who, by venturing to hunt
her for ten days in the Wood of Wonders, could take her and restore her
to her original shape. Forty years had already elapsed since she had
been first transformed.

At the commencement of her penance several beauties had risked the
trial of this fine adventure, from which so much honour was to be
derived. Each hoped to be the fortunate huntress; but as they lost
themselves in the pursuit, and at the end of ten days were no more
heard of, this ardour began to cool, and for some time past no beauty
had voluntarily offered herself; those who had recently undertaken the
task being condemned to it by the Fairies, in order to ensure their
destruction. It was, thus, to get rid of Fairer that they led her to
the Wood of Wonders. They gave her a small portion of food, for form's
sake, and placed in her hand a silken cord, with a running noose to
catch the deer. That was all her outfit for the chase. She deposited
what they gave her at the foot of a tree, and when she found herself
alone she cast a look round this vast forest, in the profound silence
and solitude of which she saw nothing but despair.

She was anxious to remain at the skirt of the forest, and not to enter
it too far, so in order to know the spot again, she placed a mark
at the point from which she started. But, alas! how did she deceive
herself! Every one lost themselves in this forest, without being
able to issue from it. In one of the paths she caught sight of the
Silver-footed Hind walking slowly. She approached it, with her silken
cord in her hand, thinking to take it; but the deer, feeling itself
pursued, started off at full speed, stopping from time to time, and
turning its head towards Fairer. They were in sight of each other all
day without being any nearer. At last night separated them.

The poor huntress was very tired and very hungry, but she no longer
knew where to find the little provision she had had given her, and
there was nothing but the hard ground for her to repose upon. She
lay down, therefore, very sadly, under a tree; she could not sleep
for a long time--she was frightened; the least thing alarmed her: a
leaf shaken by the wind made her tremble. In this miserable state she
turned her thoughts on her lover, and called him several times; but
finding him fail her in her great distress, she exclaimed, with tears
in her eyes, "Phratis! Phratis! you have abandoned me!" She was just
dropping asleep, when she felt a movement beneath her, and it seemed to
her as though she was in the best bed in the world. She slept soundly
for a considerable time, without any interruption. She was awoke in
the morning by the song of a thousand nightingales, and, turning her
beautiful eyes around, she found she was raised two feet from the
earth, the turf having sprung up under her lovely form, and thus made
a delicious couch. A large orange-tree threw its branches over her
like a tent, and she was covered with flowers. By her side were two
turtle-doves, who announced to her, by their love for each other, what
she might hope for with Phratis. The ground was entirely covered with
strawberries and all sorts of excellent fruits; she ate of them, and
found herself as well satisfied and as much strengthened by them as
though they had been the richest and best kind of meats. A stream which
flowed close by served to allay her thirst. "Oh, ye tender cares of my
lover," cried she, when she had refreshed herself, "how much I needed
you! I murmur no longer. Give me less, dearest, and let me see you!"

She would have continued in this strain had she not perceived,
stretched close to her, the Silver-footed Hind, quietly gazing at her.
She thought this time she must catch it: with one hand she held out
to it a bunch of grass, and with the other grasped the cord; but the
deer bounded lightly away, and when it had gone a short distance, it
stopped, and looked back at her. It kept up this game all day. Another
night came, and passed like the one before it. She awoke under similar
circumstances, and four days and nights elapsed in the like manner.
At length, on the fifth morning, Fairer than a Fairy, on opening her
eyes, thought she saw a light more brilliant than that of day, when she
perceived, in those of her lover, seated near her, all the affection
with which she had inspired him. He fervently kissed one of her feet;
his presence and this respectful action gratified her greatly. "You
are there, then," said she. "If I have not beheld you all these days,
I have, at all events, received the proofs of your goodness." "Say of
my love, Fairer than a Fairy," replied he. "My mother suspects that it
is I who assist you: she has placed me in confinement. I have escaped a
moment, by means of a fairy of my acquaintance. Adieu! I came only to
encourage you. You shall see me this evening, and if fortune smiles,
to-morrow we shall be happy." He departed, and she hunted again all
day. When night came, she perceived near her a little light, which
sufficed to show her her lover. "Here is my illuminated wand," said he:
"place it before you, and go without fear wherever it will lead you.
Where it stops you will perceive a great heap of dry leaves; set fire
to it, enter the place; you will see and you will find the skin of a
beast; burn it. The stars, our friends, will do the rest. Adieu!"

Fairer than a Fairy would have desired far more ample instructions;
but seeing there was no remedy, she placed the wand before her, which
showed her the way. She followed it nearly two hours, very much vexed
at doing nothing else. It stopped at last, and there, truly enough, she
perceived a large heap of dried leaves, to which she did not fail to
set fire. The light was soon so great that she could see a very high
mountain, in which she observed an opening half hid by brambles. She
separated them with her wand, and entered a dark hole; but soon after
she found herself in a vast saloon, of admirable architecture, and
lighted with numberless lamps. But what struck her with the greatest
astonishment was the sight of the skins of several wild and terrible
beasts, hung on golden hooks, which at first she mistook for the
beasts themselves. She turned away her eyes with horror, and they
were arrested in the centre of the saloon by the sight of a beautiful
palm-tree, upon one of the branches of which was suspended the skin
of the Hind with the silver feet. Fairer than a Fairy was enchanted
at seeing it, and taking it down with the aid of her wand, she
carried it quickly to the fire which she had lighted at the entrance
of the cavern. It was consumed in a moment, and re-entering joyfully
the saloon, she penetrated into several magnificent apartments. She
stopped in one, where she saw several small couches placed upon Persian
carpets, and one more beautiful than the rest under a canopy of
cloth-of-gold. But she had not much time to contemplate arrangements
which appeared to her singular, for she heard hearty peals of laughter
and several persons in loud conversation. Fairer than a Fairy turned
her steps in the direction from which the sounds proceeded, and entered
a wonderful place, where she found fifteen young ladies of celestial
beauty.

She did not surprise them less than she was surprised herself: the
extreme loveliness of her appearance took away their breath, and a deep
silence succeeded to cries of admiration. But one of these beautiful
persons, more beautiful than all the rest, advanced, with a smiling
air, towards our charming Princess. "You are my deliverer," said she,
addressing her; "I cannot doubt it; no one can enter here who is not
clothed in the skin of one of the beasts which you saw at the entrance
of the cavern; that has been the fate of all these beautiful persons
whom you see with me. After ten days of useless pursuit of me, they
were changed into so many animals during the day; but at night we
resume our human forms: and you, charming Princess, if you had not
delivered me, would have been changed into a white rabbit." "A white
rabbit!" exclaimed Fairer. "Ah, Madam, it is indeed better that I
should preserve my ordinary form, and that so wonderful a person as you
should be no longer a deer." "You have restored us all to liberty,"
replied the Fairy; "let us now pass the rest of the night as joyously
as may be, and to-morrow we will go to the Palace, and fill all the
Court with astonishment."

It is impossible to express the joy which resounded in this charming
spot, and the delight which all these young persons felt at the sweet
sensation of finding themselves once more in the land of the living,
so to speak--they were all still of the same age as when they commenced
their unfortunate chase in the Wood of Wonders, and the eldest was not
yet twenty.

The Fairy desired to take three or four hours' repose. She made Fairer
lie down beside her, and relate her adventures. She did so with so
touching a voice, her discourse was so unaffected and so full of truth,
that she engaged the Fairy without reserve to assist her love and
render her happy. She did not forget to speak to her of Désirs, and the
Fairy was immediately interested in her favour.

They went to sleep, after a long conversation, which they had agreeably
interrupted, from time to time, by the interchange of affectionate
caresses.

The next day they all set out for the Palace, wishing pleasantly
to surprise the fairies. They quitted, without regret, the Wood of
Wonders, and quickly arrived at the Palace. As they approached the
inner court, they heard a thousand melodious sounds, which composed
an excellent concert. "Here is a fête going on," said the Fairy; "we
have arrived _à propos_;" and advancing, they found the court filled
with an incredible number of people. The Fairy caused the gate to be
opened, and entered with her train. The first persons who recognised
her, uttered the loudest exclamations of delight, and the cause of this
great joy was quickly made known to the multitude. But on advancing,
the Fairy was struck by a strange spectacle. She saw a young girl more
lovely than the Graces, and with the form of Venus, bound to a stake
near a pile of wood, where apparently she was about to be burnt to
death.

Fairer than a Fairy uttered a loud cry, as she recognised Désirs; but
she was much astonished when, at the same moment, she lost sight of
her, and a young man appeared in her place, so handsome and so well
made that one might never be tired of looking at him. At this sight
Fairer uttered a still louder cry, and running towards him, without
any regard to appearances, she flung herself on his neck, exclaiming
a thousand times, "It is my brother! it is my brother." It was her
brother, who was also the fortunate lover of Princess Désirs, and who,
fearing they would put her to death, had given her the Gem of Gyges to
rescue her from the cruelty of Queen Nabote, and by so doing, became
himself visible.

The brother and sister lavished a hundred caresses on each other; the
invisible Désirs added hers, and her voice was heard, although she
was not to be seen, whilst the fairies, in unparalleled astonishment,
expressed in every variety of manner their rapture at again beholding
their virtuous Queen. The good fairies came and threw themselves at
her feet, kissing her hand and her garments. Some wept, some were
unable to speak; each testified her joy according to her peculiar
character. The bad fairies, the partisans of Nabote, also pretended to
be delighted, and policy gave an air of sincerity to their hypocritical
demonstrations. Nabote herself, in despair at this return, controlled
herself with an art of which she alone was capable. She offered at
once to resign her power to the rightful sovereign, who, with a grave
and majestic air, demanded of her why the young girl whom she had seen
bound to the stake merited such a punishment, and since when they had
been accustomed to celebrate a cruel execution by fêtes and sports.
Nabote excused herself very lamely, and the Queen listened impatiently
when the lover of Désirs spoke thus: "They punish this Princess," said
he, "because she is too amiable; they torment for the same reason the
Princess my sister. They were both born as handsome as you now behold
them." He then begged his lady-love to cover up the Gem of Gyges, and
she immediately appeared again. Désirs charmed all who saw her. "They
are beautiful," pursued he; "they possess a thousand virtues which
they do not derive from the fairies; that is why they are roused up
to persecute them. What injustice, to tyrannize over all those whose
charms do not emanate from yourselves." The Prince paused: the Queen
turned towards the assembly with an agreeable air. "I demand," said
she, "that these three persons shall be given up to me; they shall
enjoy the most happy fate that can fall to the lot of mortals. I owe
much to Fairer than a Fairy, and she shall be rewarded for the service
she has done me by uninterrupted felicity. You shall continue to reign,
Madam," added she, turning to Nabote: "this empire is sufficiently
large for you and me. Go to the Beautiful Islands, which belong to you.
Leave me your son; I will share my power with him, and I will marry him
to Fairer than a Fairy; this union will reconcile us to one another."

Nabote was enraged at all these decisions of the Queen, but it was of
no use to complain, she was not the strongest. She had but to obey.
She was about to do so with a bad grace, when the beautiful Phratis
arrived, followed by a gallant train of youths who composed his Court;
he came to pay his homage to the Queen, and manifest his joy at her
return. But in passing, he cast a look at Fairer than a Fairy, and made
her comprehend by his passionate glances that she was the first object
of his devotion.

The Queen embraced him, and presented him to Fairer, begging him to
accept her at her hands. There is no need to say he obeyed joyfully,
exclaiming with transport,

    "Oh Love! for all my tender care and aid,
    By this rich guerdon I am overpaid!"

The two marriages were celebrated on the same day. Both couples were
so happy, that 'tis said they are the only pairs who have ever really
gained the golden Vine,[13] and that those who have been since named as
having done so are purely fabulous personages.

Thus innocence triumphs over the misfortunes with which it is assailed.
Envy and jealousy only serve to increase its lustre; and often the
justice of Heaven renders its possessors happier for the trials they
have undergone. There is a Providence which watches over the conduct of
mortals, and delights in rewarding the worthy, even in this world.


FOOTNOTES:

[11] A favourite palace of Louis XIV., four leagues west
of Paris, and the scene of many celebrated entertainments. It was
destroyed in the Revolution of 1789.

[12] A shepherd who, according to the story told by Plato, was
possessed of a ring which he took off the finger of a dead man enclosed
in the body of a brazen horse, and which rendered the wearer invisible.
By means of this ring he became King of Lydia.

[13] _La vigne d'or_, more commonly _la vigne de l'évêque_.
"On dit d'un mari et d'une femme qui passent la première année de leur
mariage sans s'en repentir, qu'ils auront la vigne de l'evêque."--P.
J. Le Roux, _Dictionnaire Comique_. In the only English version I have
seen of this story, "the golden vine" is of course transformed into
"the flitch of bacon."




THE GOOD WOMAN.


There was once upon a time a Good Woman, who was kind, candid, and
courageous. She had experienced all the vicissitudes which can agitate
human existence.

She had resided at Court, and had endured all the storms to which it
is so subject:--treasons, perfidies, infidelities, loss of wealth,
loss of friends. So that, disgusted with dwelling in a place in which
dissimulation and hypocrisy have established their empire, and weary
of an intercourse wherein hearts never appear as they really are, she
resolved to quit her own country and go to a distance, where she could
forget the world, and where the world would hear no more of her.

When she believed herself far enough off, she built a small house in
an extremely agreeable situation. All she could then do was to buy a
little flock of sheep, which furnished her with food and clothing.

She had hardly made trial of this mode of life before she found herself
perfectly happy. "There is, then, some state of existence in which
one may enjoy content," said she; "and the choice I have made leaves
me nothing to desire." She passed each day in plying her distaff and
tending her flock. She would sometimes have liked a little society, but
she feared the danger of it. She was insensibly becoming accustomed
to the life she led, when one day, as she was endeavouring to collect
her little flock, it began to scatter itself over the country and
fly from her. In fact, it fled so fast that in a very short time she
could scarcely see one of her sheep. "Am I a devouring wolf?" cried
she: "what means this wonder?" She called to a favourite ewe, but it
appeared not to know her voice. She ran after it, exclaiming, "I
will not care for losing all the rest of the flock if thou dost but
remain to me!" But the ungrateful creature continued its flight, and
disappeared with the rest.

The Good Woman was deeply distressed at the loss she had sustained.
"I have now nothing left," cried she; "maybe I shall not find even
my garden; or my little cottage will be no longer in its place." She
returned slowly, for she was very tired with the race she had had. She
lived upon fruit and vegetables for some time after exhausting a small
stock of cheese.

She began to see the end of all this. "Fortune," said she, "thou hast
in vain sought to persecute me even in this remote spot; thou canst not
prevent me from being ready to behold the gates of death without alarm,
and after so much trouble I shall descend with tranquillity into those
peaceful shades."

She had nothing more to spin, she had nothing more to eat: leaning on
her distaff, she bent her steps towards a little wood, and looking
round for a place to rest in, she was astonished at seeing run towards
her three little children, more beautiful than the fairest day. She
was delighted to see such charming company. They loaded her with a
hundred caresses, and as she seated herself on the ground, in order to
receive them more conveniently, one threw its little arms round her
neck, the other encircled her waist from behind, and the third called
her "mother." She waited a long time, to see if some one would not come
to fetch them, believing that those who had led them thither would not
fail to return for them. All the day passed without her seeing any one.

She resolved to take them to her own home, and thought Heaven had sent
her this little flock instead of the one she had lost. It was composed
of two girls, who were only two or three years old, and a little boy of
five. Each had a little ribbon round its neck, to which was attached
a small jewel. One was a golden cherry enamelled with crimson, and
engraved with the name of "Lirette." She thought that this must be
the name of the little girl who wore it, and she resolved to call her
by it. The other was a medlar, on which was written "Mirtis;" and the
little boy had an almond of green enamel, around which was written
"Finfin." The Good Woman felt perfectly satisfied that these were their
names.

The little girls had some jewels in their head-dresses, and more than
enough to put the Good Woman in easy circumstances. She had very soon
bought another flock, and surrounded herself with everything necessary
for the maintenance of her interesting family. She made their winter
clothing of the bark of trees, and in the summer they had white cotton
dresses of the finest bleaching.

Young as they were, they tended their flock. And this time the flock
was faithful, and was more docile and obedient to them than towards the
large dogs which guarded them; and these dogs were also gentle, and
attached to the children. They grew visibly, and passed their days most
innocently; they loved the Good Woman, and were all three excessively
fond of each other. They occupied themselves in tending their sheep,
fishing with a line, spreading nets to catch birds, working in a little
garden of their own, and employed their delicate hands in cultivating
flowers.

There was one rose-tree, which the young Lirette was especially fond
of; she watered it often, and took the greatest care of it; she thought
nothing so beautiful as a rose, and loved it above all other flowers.
She had a fancy one day to open a bud, and try to find its heart, when
in so doing she pricked her finger with a thorn. The pain was sharp,
and she began to cry; the beautiful Finfin, who very seldom left her,
approached, and began to cry too, at seeing her suffer. He took her
little finger, pressed it, and squeezed the blood gently from it.

The Good Woman, who saw their alarm at this accident, approached, and
learning the cause of it, "Why so inquisitive" said she; "why destroy
the flower you loved so much?" "I wanted its heart," replied Lirette.
"Such desires are always fatal," replied the Good Woman. "But, mother,"
pursued Lirette, "why has this flower, which is so beautiful, and
which pleases me so much, thorns?" "To show you," said the Good Woman,
"that we must distrust the greater part of those things which please
our eyes, and that the most agreeable objects hide snares which may be
to us most deadly." "How?" replied Lirette. "Must one not then love
everything which is pleasant?" "No, certainly," said the Good Woman,
"and you must take good care not to do so." "But I love my brother with
all my heart," replied she; "he is so handsome and so charming." "You
may love your brother," replied her mother; "but if he were not your
brother you ought not to love him."

Lirette shook her head, and thought this rule very hard. Finfin
meanwhile was still occupied with her finger; he squeezed on the wound
the juice of the rose-leaves, and wrapped it in them. The Good Woman
asked him why he did that? "Because I think," said he, "that the remedy
may be found in the same thing which has caused the evil." The Good
Woman smiled at this reason. "My dear child," replied she, "not in
this case." "I thought it was in all cases," said he; "for sometimes,
when Lirette looks at me, she troubles me greatly; I feel quite
agitated; and the moment after those same looks cause me a pleasure
which I cannot express to you. When she scolds me sometimes, I am very
wretched; but let her speak at length one gentle word to me, I am all
joy again."

The Good Woman wondered what these children would think of next; she
did not know their relation to each other, and she dreaded their loving
each other too much. She would have given anything to learn if they
were brother and sister; her ignorance on this point caused her great
anxiety, but their extreme youth re-assured her. Finfin was already
full of attention to the little Lirette; he loved her much better
than Mirtis. He had at one time given her some young partridges, the
prettiest in the world, which he had caught. She reared one, which
became a fine bird, with very beautiful plumage; Lirette loved it
excessively, and gave it to Finfin. It followed him everywhere, and he
taught it a thousand diverting tricks. He had one day taken it with
him when going to tend his flock; on returning home he could not find
his partridge; he sought for it everywhere, and distressed himself
greatly at its loss. Mirtis tried to console him, but without success.
"Sister," he replied, "I am in despair. Lirette will be angry; all
you say to me does not diminish my grief." "Well, brother," said she,
"we will get up very early to-morrow and go in search of another; I
cannot bear to see you so miserable." Lirette arrived as she said this,
and having learnt the cause of Finfin's sorrow, she began to smile.
"My dear brother," said she to him, "we will find another partridge;
it is nothing but the state in which I see you that gives me pain."
These words sufficed to restore serenity and calm to the heart and
countenance of Finfin.

"Why," said he to himself, "could Mirtis not restore my spirits, with
all her kindness, while Lirette has done it with a single little word?
Two is one too many--Lirette is enough for me." On the other hand,
Mirtis saw plainly that her brother made a difference between her and
Lirette. "We are not enough here, being three," said she. "I ought
to have another brother, who would love me as much as Finfin does my
sister."

Lirette was now twelve years old, Mirtis thirteen, and Finfin fifteen,
when one evening, after supper, they were all seated in front of the
cottage with the Good Woman, who instructed them in a hundred agreeable
things. The youthful Finfin, seeing Lirette playing with the jewel on
her neck, asked his dear mamma what it was for? She replied that she
had found one on each of them when they fell into her hands. Lirette
then said, "If mine would but do as I tell it, I should be glad." "And
what would you have it do?" asked Finfin. "You will see," said she; and
then taking the end of the ribbon, "Little cherry," she continued, "I
should like to have a beautiful house of roses."

At the same moment they heard a slight noise behind them. Mirtis turned
round first, and uttered a loud cry; she had cause; for instead of the
cottage of the Good Woman, there appeared one of the most charming that
could possibly be seen. It was not lofty, but the roof was formed of
roses that would bloom in winter as well as in summer. They entered it,
and found the most agreeable apartments, furnished magnificently. In
the midst of each room was a rose-tree in full flower, in a precious
vase; and in the first which they entered, they found the partridge
Finfin had lost, which flew on to his shoulder and gave him an hundred
caresses.

"Is it only to wish?" said Mirtis; and taking the ribbon of her jewel
in her hand, "Little medlar," she continued, "give us a garden more
beautiful than our own." Hardly had she finished speaking, when a
garden was presented to their view of extraordinary beauty, and in
which everything that could be imagined to delight the senses appeared
in the highest perfection.

The young folks began immediately to run through the beautiful alleys,
amongst the flower-beds and round about the fountains.

"Do you wish something, brother," said Lirette. "But I have nothing
to wish for," said he; "except to be loved by you as much as you are
loved by me." "Oh," replied she, "my heart can satisfy you on that
point. That does not depend on your almond." "Well, then," said Finfin,
"almond, little almond, I wish that a great forest should rise near
here, in which the King's son shall come to hunt, and that he shall
fall in love with Mirtis."

"What have I done to you," replied the beautiful girl. "I do not wish
to leave the innocent life which we lead." "You are right, my child,"
said the Good Woman, "and I admire the wisdom of your sentiments;
besides which, they say that this King is a cruel usurper, who has put
to death the rightful sovereign and all his family: perhaps the son may
be no better than his father."

The Good Woman, however, was quite astonished at the strange wishes
of these wonderful children, and knew not what to think of them. When
night was come, she retired into the house of roses, and in the morning
she found that there was a large forest close to the house. It formed a
fine hunting ground for our young shepherds. Finfin often hunted down
in it deer, harts, and roebucks.

He gave a fawn whiter than snow to the lovely Lirette; it followed her
as the partridge followed Finfin; and when they were separated for a
short period, they wrote to each other, and sent their notes by these
messengers. It was the prettiest thing in the world.

The little family lived thus tranquilly, occupied with different
employments, according to the seasons. They always attended to their
flocks, but in the summer their occupations were most pleasant. They
hunted much in the winter; they had bows and arrows, and sometimes went
such long distances that they returned, with slow steps and almost
frozen, to the house of roses.

The Good Woman would receive them by a large fire; she did not know
which to begin to warm first. "Lirette, my daughter Lirette," she
would say, "place your little feet here." And taking Mirtis in her
arms,--"Mirtis, my child," continued she, "give me your beautiful hands
to warm; and you my son, Finfin, come nearer." Then, placing them
all three on a sofa, she would pay them every attention in the most
charming and gentle manner.

Thus they passed their days in peace and happiness. The Good Woman
wondered at the sympathy between Finfin and Lirette, for Mirtis was
as beautiful, and had no less amiable qualities; but certainly Finfin
did not love her as fervently as the other. "If they are brother and
sister, as I believe," said the Good Woman, "by their matchless beauty,
what shall I do? They are so similar in everything, that they must
assuredly be of the same blood. If it be so, this affection is very
dangerous; if not, I might render it legitimate by letting them marry;
and they both love me so much, that their union would ensure joy and
peace to my declining days."

In her uncertainty, she had forbidden Lirette, who was fast advancing
to womanhood, to be ever alone with Finfin, and for better security
she had ordered Mirtis to be always with them. Lirette obeyed her with
perfect submission, and Mirtis did also as she had commanded her. The
Good Woman had heard speak of a clever fairy, and resolved to go in
search of her, and endeavour to enlighten herself respecting the fate
of these children.

One day, when Lirette was slightly indisposed, and Mirtis and Finfin
were out hunting, the Good Woman thought it a convenient opportunity to
go in search of Madam Tu-tu, for such was the name of the fairy. She
left Lirette, therefore, at the House of Roses; but she had not got far
on her way before she met Lirette's fawn, which was going towards the
forest, and at the same time she saw Finfin's partridge coming from it.
They joined each other close to her. It was not without astonishment
that she saw round the neck of each a little ribbon, with a paper
attached. She called the partridge, which flew to her, and taking the
paper from it, she read these lines:--

    To Lirette, dear bird, repair--
    Absent from her sight I languish,--
    All my love to her declare--
    Secret joy and silent anguish.
    Much too cold her heart, I fear,
    Such a passion e'er to know
    Were I to her but half as dear,
    No greater bliss I'd crave below.

"What words!" cried the Good Woman,--"what phrases! Simple friendship
does not express itself with so much warmth." Then stopping the fawn,
which came to lick her hand, she unfastened the paper from its neck,
opened it, and found in it these words:--

    The sun is setting,--you are absent yet,
    Although you left me by its earliest light!
    Return, dear Finfin; surely you forget--
    Without you, day to me is endless night!

"Just as they did when I was in the world," continued the Good Woman;
"who could have taught Lirette so much in this desert? What can I do to
cut betimes the root of so pernicious an evil?" "Eh, Madam, what are
you so anxious about?" said the partridge; "let them alone--those who
conduct them know better than you."

The Good Woman remained speechless: she knew well that the partridge
spoke by means of supernatural art. The notes fell from her hands in
her fright; the fawn and the partridge picked them up: the one ran and
the other flew; and the partridge called so often "Tu-tu," that the
Good Woman thought it must be that powerful fairy who had caused it to
speak. She recovered herself a little after this reflection, but not
feeling equal to the journey she had undertaken, she retraced her steps
to the House of Roses.

Meanwhile Finfin and Mirtis had hunted the livelong day, and, being
tired, they had placed their game on the ground, and sat down to rest
under a tree, where they fell asleep.

The King's son also hunted that day in the forest. He missed his suite,
and came to the place where our young shepherd and shepherdess were
reposing. He contemplated them for some time with wonder. Finfin had
made a pillow of his game-bag, and the head of Mirtis reclined on the
breast of Finfin.

The Prince thought Mirtis so beautiful, that he precipitately
dismounted from his horse to examine her features with more attention.
He judged, by their scrips and the simplicity of their apparel, that
they were only some shepherd's children. He sighed from grief, having
already sighed from love, and this love, even, was followed in an
instant by jealousy. The position in which he found these young people
made him believe that such familiarity could only result from the
affection which united them.

  [Illustration: The Good Woman.--P. 210.]

In this uneasy state of mind, not being able to tolerate their
prolonged repose, he touched the handsome Finfin with his spear. He
started up, and, seeing a man before him, he passed his hand over the
face of Mirtis, and awoke her, calling her "sister," a name which
dissipated in a moment the alarm of the young Prince.

Mirtis rose up, quite astonished; she had never seen any one but
Finfin. The young Prince was the same age as herself. He was superbly
attired, and had a face full of charming expression.

He began saying many sweet things to her. She listened to him with a
pleasure which she had never before experienced, and she responded to
them in a simple manner, full of grace. Finfin saw that it was getting
late, and the fawn having arrived with Lirette's letter, he told his
sister it was time to go home. "Come, brother," said she to the young
Prince, giving him her hand, "come with us into the House of Roses."
For as she believed Finfin to be her brother, she thought that every
one who was handsome, like him, must be her brother also.

The young Prince did not require much pressing to follow her. Finfin
threw on the back of his fawn the game he had shot, and the handsome
Prince carried the bow and the game-bag of Mirtis.

In this order they arrived at the House of Roses. Lirette came out to
meet them. She gave the Prince a smiling reception, and turning towards
Mirtis, "I am delighted," said she, "that you have had such good sport."

They went all together to seek the Good Woman, to whom the Prince made
known his high birth. She paid due attention to so illustrious a guest,
and gave him a handsome apartment. He remained two or three days with
her, and this was long enough to complete his conquest by Mirtis,
according to Finfin's request to his little almond.

Meanwhile, the suite of the Prince had been much surprised at his
absence. They had found his horse, and they believed that some
frightful accident had befallen him. They sought him everywhere, and
the wicked King, who was his father, was in a great fury at their not
being able to find him. The Queen, his mother, who was very amiable,
and sister of the King whom her husband had cruelly murdered, was in
an inconceivable state of grief at the loss of her son.

In her extreme distress, she sent secretly in search of Madam Tu-tu,
who was an old friend of hers, but whom she had not seen for some
time, because the King hated her, and had done her much injury
with a person she dearly loved. Madam Tu-tu arrived, without being
perceived, in the cabinet of the Queen. After they had embraced each
other affectionately--for there is not much difference between a Queen
and a Fairy, they having almost equal power,--the Fairy Tu-tu told
her that she would very soon see her son. She begged her not to make
herself uneasy, and not to be at all distressed at anything that might
happen--that either she was very much deceived, or she could promise
her a delight which was quite unexpected by her, and that she would be
one day the happiest of creatures.

The King's people made so many inquiries for the Prince, and sought him
with so much care, that at length they found him at the House of Roses.

They led him back to the King, who scolded him brutally, as though he
were not the most beautiful youth in the world. He remained very sad
at the Court of his father, and thinking of his beautiful Mirtis. At
length his grief was so visible on his countenance, that he was obliged
to take his mother into his confidence, who consoled him extremely.
"If you will mount your beautiful palfrey," said he, "and come to the
House of Roses, you will be charmed with what you will see." The Queen
consented willingly, and took her son with her, who was enchanted at
seeing his dear mistress again.

The Queen was astonished at the great beauty of Mirtis, and also at
that of Lirette and Finfin. She embraced them with as much tenderness
as if they had been all her own children, and conceived an immense
friendship from that moment for the Good Woman. She admired the house,
the garden, and all the curiosities she saw there. When she returned,
the King desired her to give an account of her journey; she did so
naturally, and he took a great fancy to go also and see the wonders
which she described. His son asked permission to accompany him; he
consented with a sullen air, for he never did anything with a good
grace. As soon as he saw the House of Roses he coveted it; he paid
not the least attention to the charming inhabitants of this beautiful
place, and, by way of commencing to take possession of their property,
he said that he would sleep there that evening.

The Good Woman was very much vexed at such a resolution. She heard an
uproar, and saw a disorder in her household, which frightened her.
"What has become," cried she, "of the happy tranquillity which I once
enjoyed here! The least breath of fortune destroys all the calm of
life!"

She gave the King an excellent bed, and withdrew into a corner of the
dwelling with her little family. The wicked King went to bed, but found
it impossible to go to sleep, and opening his eyes, he saw at the
foot of his couch a little old woman, who was not half a yard high,
and about as broad; she had great spectacles, which covered all her
face, and she made frightful grimaces at him. The base are generally
cowards. He was in a terrible fright, and felt at the same time a
thousand points of needles pricking him all over. In this tormenting
state of body and mind, he was kept awake the entire night, and made
a great noise about it. The King stormed and swore in language which
was not at all consistent with his dignity. "Sleep, sleep, sire," said
the partridge, "or let us sleep: if the condition of royalty is so
full of anxiety, I prefer being a partridge to being king." The King
was more than ever alarmed at these words; he commanded them to seize
the partridge, which roosted in a porcelain vase; but she flew away
at this order, beating his face with her wings. He still saw the same
vision, and felt the same prickings; he was dreadfully frightened, and
his anger became more furious. "Ah!" said he, "it is a spell of this
sorceress, whom they call the Good Woman. I will rid myself of her and
all her race by putting them to death!"

He got up, not being able to rest in bed; and as soon as day broke,
he commanded his guards to seize all the innocent little family, and
fling them into dungeons. He had them dragged before him, that he
might witness their despair. Those charming faces, bedewed with tears,
touched him not; on the contrary, he felt a malignant joy at the sight.
His son, whose tender heart was rent by so sad a spectacle, could not
turn his eyes upon Mirtis without an agony which nothing could exceed.
A true lover, on such occasions, suffers more than the person beloved.

They seized these poor innocents, and were leading them away, when the
young Finfin, who had no arms with which to oppose these barbarians,
took the ribbon on a sudden from his neck. "Little almond," cried he,
"I wish that we were out of the power of the King!" "And with his
greatest enemies, my dear cherry!" continued Lirette. "And that we
might take away with us the handsome Prince, my medlar!" added Mirtis.
They had hardly uttered these words when they found themselves with
the Prince, the partridge, and the fawn, all together in a car, which
rising with them in the air, they soon lost sight of the King and the
House of Roses.

Mirtis had no sooner expressed her wish than she repented of it. She
knew well that she had inconsiderately allowed herself to be carried
away by an impulse of which she was not the mistress; therefore, during
all the journey, she kept her eyes cast down, and felt much abashed.
The Good Woman gave her a severe glance. "My daughter," said she, "you
have not done well to separate the Prince from his father; however
unjust he may be, he ought not to leave him." "Ah, Madam," replied the
Prince, "do not complain that I have the happiness of following you. I
respect the King, my father; but I should have left him a hundred times
had it not been for the virtue, the kindness, and tenderness of the
Queen, my mother, which have always detained me."

As he finished these words, they found themselves in front of a
beautiful palace, where they alighted and were received by Madam Tu-tu.
She was the most lovely person in the world--young, lively, and gay.
She paid them a hundred compliments, and confessed to them that it
was she who had given them all the pleasures which they had enjoyed
in their lives, and had also bestowed on them the cherry, the almond,
and the medlar, the virtues of which were at an end, as they had now
arrived in her dominions. Then, addressing the Prince in private, she
told him that she had heard speak a thousand times of the annoyance
he had met with from his father; but, in order that he should not
attribute to her any evil that might hereafter befal the King, she
frankly admitted she had played him some tricks, but that was the full
extent of her vengeance.

After that, she assured them that they would be all very happy with
her; that they should have flocks to keep, crooks, bows, arrows, and
fishing-rods, in order that they might amuse themselves in a hundred
different ways. She gave them shepherds' dresses of the most elegant
description, including the Prince with the others,--their names and
devices being on their crooks; and that very evening the young Prince
exchanged crooks with the charming Mirtis.

The next day Madame Tu-tu led them to the most delightful promenade in
the world, and showed them the best pasturage for their sheep, and a
fine country for the chase.

"You can go," said she, "on this side as far as that beautiful river,
but never to the opposite shore; and you may hunt in this wood; but
beware," said she, "of passing a great oak, which is in the midst of
the forest; it is very remarkable, for it has roots and trunk of iron.
If you go beyond it, misfortunes may happen to you, from which I cannot
protect you; and, besides that, I should not perhaps be in a position
to assist you promptly, for a fairy has plenty of occupation."

The young shepherds assured her that they would do exactly as she
prescribed; and all four, leading their flocks into the meadows, left
Madam Tu-tu alone with the Good Woman. She remarked some anxiety in her
manner. "What is the matter, madam?" said the Fairy; "what cloud has
come over your mind?" "I will not deny," said the Good Woman, "that
I am uneasy at leaving them all thus together. I have for some time
perceived with sorrow that Finfin and Lirette love each other more
than is desirable, and here, to add to my trouble, another attachment
springs up: the Prince and Mirtis do not dislike each other, and I fear
to leave their youth exposed to the wandering of their hearts."

"You have brought up these two young girls so well," replied Madam
Tu-tu, "that you need fear nothing: I will answer for their discretion;
I will enlighten you as to their destiny."

She then informed her that Finfin was the son of the wicked King, and
brother of the young Prince; that Mirtis and Lirette were sisters, and
daughters of the deceased King, who had been murdered, and who was the
brother of the Queen, whom the cruel usurper had married,--so that
these four young persons were near relations; that the wicked King had
ascended the throne after having committed a hundred atrocities, which
he wished to crown by the murder of the two Princesses; that the Queen
did all she could to prevent him, and not being able to succeed, she
had called her (the Fairy) to her assistance; that she then told the
Queen she would save them, but that she could only do so by taking with
them her eldest son; that she undertook to promise she should see them
again some day in happiness; that on those conditions, the Queen had
consented to a separation, which appeared at first very hard; that she
had carried them all three off, and that she had confided them to the
care of the Good Woman as the person most worthy of such an office.

After this the Fairy begged her to be at ease, assuring her that the
union of these young Princes would restore peace to the kingdom,
wherein Finfin would reign with Lirette. The Good Woman listened to
this discourse with great interest; but not without letting fall
some tears. Madam Tu-tu was surprised at this emotion, and asked the
cause. "Alas!" said she, "I fear they will lose their innocence by
this grandeur to which they will be elevated, and that so brilliant a
fortune will corrupt their virtue."

"No," replied the Fairy, "do not fear so great a misfortune; the
principles you have instilled into them are too excellent. It is
possible to be a king and yet an honest man. You know that there is one
in the universe who is the model of perfect monarchs.[14] Therefore set
your mind at rest; I shall be with you as much as possible, and I hope
you will not be melancholy here."

The Good Woman believed her, and after a short time felt perfectly
satisfied. The young shepherds were so happy also that they desired
nothing but the continuance of their agreeable mode of life. Their
pleasures, although tranquil, were not without interest: they saw each
other every day, and the days only appeared to them too short.

The bad King learnt that they were with Madam Tu-tu, but all his power
could not take them away from her. He knew by what magic spells she
protected them; he saw clearly that he could only get the better of
them by stratagem; he had not been able to inhabit the House of Roses
in consequence of the continual tricks played on him by Madam Tu-tu; he
hated her more than ever, as well as the Good Woman; and his hatred now
extended also to his son.

He employed all kinds of artifice in order to get into his power
some one of the four young shepherds, but his art did not extend to
the dominions of Madam Tu-tu. One unlucky day (there are some which
we cannot avoid), these amiable shepherds had bent their steps in the
direction of the fatal oak, when the beautiful Lirette perceived upon
a tree, about twenty paces distant, a bird of such rare plumage, that
she let fly an arrow at it on the impulse of the moment, and seeing the
bird fall dead, ran to pick it up. All this was done instantaneously,
and without reflection; but the poor Lirette found, to her cost, that
she was caught herself. It was impossible for her to return; she
desired, but had no power to do so. She discovered her error, and
all she could do was to extend her arms for pity to her brothers and
sisters. Mirtis began to cry, and Finfin, without hesitation, ran to
her. "I will perish with you," he cried, and in a moment had joined her.

Mirtis wished to follow them, but the young Prince detained her. "Let
us go and apprise Madame Tu-tu of this," said he; "that is the best
assistance we can render them." At the same moment they saw the people
of the wicked King seize them, and all they could do was to cry adieu
to each other.

The King had caused this beautiful bird to be placed there by his
hunters, to serve as a snare for the shepherds: he fully expected what
had come to pass. They led Lirette and Finfin before the cruel monarch,
who abused them terribly, and had them confined in a dark and strong
prison: it was then they began to lament that their little cherry and
almond had lost their virtue. The fawn and the partridge sought for
them, but the fawn not being able to see them, shed some tears of
grief, and finding the King had given orders that she should be taken
and burnt alive, she saved herself by running fast to Mirtis. The
partridge was more fortunate, for she saw them every day through the
grating of their prison: happily for them, the King had not thought of
separating them. When one loves, it is a pleasure to suffer together.

The partridge flew back every day, and came to tell the news to Madame
Tu-tu, the Good Woman, and Mirtis. Mirtis was very unhappy, and without
the handsome Prince she would have been inconsolable. She resolved to
write to these poor captives by the faithful partridge, and hung a
little bottle of ink to her neck, with some paper, and put a pen in her
beak. The good partridge, thus loaded, presented herself at the bars of
the prison, and it was a great delight to our young shepherds to see
her again. Finfin put out his hand and took from her all she brought
him, after which they began to read as follows:[15]

          _Mirtis and the Prince to Lirette and Finfin._

 "Know you how we languish during this cruel separation; that we sigh
 incessantly, and that perhaps it may kill us. We should already have
 died, had we not been sustained by hope. That hope has supported us
 ever since Madam Tu-tu has assured us that you still lived. Believe
 us, dear Lirette and Finfin, we shall meet again, despite of malice,
 and be happy."

This letter had a powerful effect on the minds of Lirette and Finfin.
They were filled with joy, and wrote immediately this reply:--

           _Lirette and Finfin to Mirtis and the Prince._

 "We have received your letter with extreme pleasure. It has rejoiced
 us more than we could have anticipated. In these regions of horror
 our torments would be insupportable, but for the sweet consolation we
 derive from each other's presence. Near the object of our affections,
 we are insensible to pain, and love renders everything delightful.
 Adieu, dear Prince, adieu, Mirtis. Encourage your mutual passion. Be
 always inspired by a tender fidelity. You hold out a hope to us in
 which we participate. The greatest blessing which can occur to us will
 be accompanied by your presence."

Finfin having attached this note to the neck of the partridge, she
flew away with it very quickly. The young shepherds received great
consolation from it, but the Good Woman could not be comforted from
the moment she had been separated from those so dear to her, and
whom she knew to be in so much peril. "How quickly my happiness has
vanished," said she to Madame Tu-tu; "I seem to have been born only
to be continually agitated. I thought I had taken the only means for
ensuring my repose; how purblind are mortals!" "And do you not know,"
replied the Fairy, "that there is no state of existence in this world
in which one can live always happily." "I do," replied the Good Woman,
mournfully; "and if one cannot find happiness in one's self, it is
seldom found elsewhere. But, Madam, consider the fate of my children, I
beg of you!" "They have not remembered the orders I gave them," replied
Madame Tu-tu; "but let us think of a remedy."

Madame Tu-tu entered her library with the Good Woman. She read nearly
all the night, and having at length taken down and opened a large book,
which she had frequently passed over, although its sides were covered
with plates of gold, she appeared plunged, on a sudden, into a state
of excessive sadness. After some time, and just as day was breaking,
the Good Woman observing a few tears fall on the leaves of the book,
took the liberty to ask the cause of the Fairy's sorrow. "I grieve,"
said she, "at the irrevocable decree of Fate, which I have learned from
these pages, and which I shudder and tremble to acquaint you with."
"Are they dead?" cried the Good Woman. "No," pursued Madame Tu-tu; "but
nothing can save them, unless you or I go and present ourselves to the
King, and satisfy his vengeance. I confess the truth to you, Madam,"
continued the Fairy, "that I do not feel sufficient affection for them,
nor enough courage, to go thus and expose myself to his fury, and I
question, also, if any one could be found capable of such a sacrifice."
"Pardon me, Madam," replied the Good Woman, with great firmness; "I
will go seek this King; no sacrifice is too great for me that will save
my children. I will pour out for them, with all my heart, every drop of
blood which I have in my veins."

Madam Tu-tu could not sufficiently admire so grand a resolution; she
promised to assist her in every way in her power; but that she found
herself limited in this instance, in consequence of the fault which
they had committed. The Good Woman took leave of her, and would not
acquaint Mirtis or the Prince with her design, for fear of affecting
them and weakening her own determination. She set out with the
partridge flying by her side; and as they passed the iron oak, the
partridge snatched with her beak a little moss from its trunk, and
placed it in the hands of the Good Woman. "When you are in the greatest
peril which can befall you," said she to her, "throw this moss at the
feet of the King." The Good Woman treasured up these words, and hardly
had she advanced some steps when she was seized by some of the wicked
King's soldiers, whom he always kept in readiness on the outskirts of
the domain of Madam Tu-tu. They led her before him. "I have thee at
last, wicked creature!" said he; "I will put thee to death by the most
cruel torture!" "I came but for that purpose," replied she, "and thou
mayst exercise thy cruelty as thou wilt on me, only spare my children,
who are so young and incapable of having offended thee. I offer thee
my life for theirs." All who heard these words were filled with pity
at her magnanimity; the King alone was unmoved. The Queen, who was
present, shed a torrent of tears. The King was so indignant with
her that he would have killed her, if her attendants had not placed
themselves between them. She fled, uttering piercing cries.

The barbarous King caused the Good Woman to be shut up, ordering them
to feed her well, in order to render approaching death more frightful
to her. He commanded them to fill a pit with snakes, vipers, and
serpents, promising himself the pleasure of precipitating the Good
Woman into it. What a horrible mode of execution! It makes one shudder
to think of it!

The officers of this unjust Prince obeyed him with regret; and when
they had fulfilled this frightful order, the King came to the spot.
They were about to bind the Good Woman, when she begged them not to do
so, assuring them that she had sufficient courage to meet death with
her hands free; and, feeling she had no time to lose, she approached
the King, and threw the moss at his feet. He was at that moment close
to the frightful gulf, and stepping forward to inspect it again with
pleasure, his feet slipped on the moss, and he fell in. Hardly had he
reached the bottom of the pit, when the sanguinary reptiles darted upon
him, and stung him to death, and the Good Woman, at the same instant,
found herself in company with her dear partridge in the House of Roses.

Whilst these things were happening, Finfin and Lirette were almost dead
with misery in their fearful prison; their innocent affection alone
kept them alive. They were saying very sad and very affecting things to
each other, when they perceived on a sudden the doors of their dungeon
open and admit Mirtis, the handsome Prince, and Madam Tu-tu, who threw
themselves on their necks, and who, though speaking all at once

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Old-Time Stories
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Old-Time Stories

Author: Charles Perrault

Illustrator: W. Heath Robinson

Translator: A. E. Johnson

Release date: February 27, 2010 [eBook #31431]
                Most recently updated: January 6, 2021

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chris Curnow, Iris Gehring and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLD-TIME STORIES ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Iris Gehring and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









[Illustration: Decoration]

OLD-TIME STORIES

[Illustration: "THEY REACHED THE HOUSE WHERE THE LIGHT WAS BURNING."]




OLD-TIME STORIES

  _told by_

MASTER CHARLES PERRAULT

  _translated from
  the French by
  A·E·Johnson
  with illustrations
  by_

W·HEATH ROBINSON

[Illustration: Decoration]

  NEW YORK
  DODD, MEAD & COMPANY





_First Published, 1921_

_Printed in Great Britain_





PREFATORY NOTE


Of the eleven tales which the present volume comprises, the first eight
are from the master-hand of Charles Perrault. Charles Perrault
(1628-1703) enjoyed much distinction in his day, and is familiar to
students of French literature for the prominent part that he played in
the famous _Quarrel of the Ancients and Moderns_, which so keenly
occupied French men of letters in the latter part of the seventeenth
century. But his fame to-day rests upon his authorship of the
traditional _Tales of Mother Goose; or Stories of Olden Times_, and so
long as there are children to listen spellbound to the adventures of
Cinderella, Red Riding Hood, and that arch rogue Puss in Boots, his
memory will endure.

To the eight tales of Perrault three others have been added here.
'Beauty and the Beast,' by Mme Leprince de Beaumont (1711-1781), has a
celebrity which warrants its inclusion, however inferior it may seem, as
an example of the story-teller's art, to the masterpieces of Perrault.
'Princess Rosette' and 'The Friendly Frog' are from the prolific pen of
Mme d'Aulnoy (1650-1705), a contemporary of Perrault, whom she could
sometimes rival in invention, if never in dramatic power.




[Illustration: Decoration]




  CONTENTS


                                                                   PAGE

  THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD                                     1

  PUSS IN BOOTS                                                      21

  LITTLE TOM THUMB                                                   34

  THE FAIRIES                                                        55

  RICKY OF THE TUFT                                                  61

  CINDERELLA                                                         75

  LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD                                             92

  BLUE BEARD                                                         99

  BEAUTY AND THE BEAST                                              113

  THE FRIENDLY FROG                                                 138

  PRINCESS ROSETTE                                                  174




  LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


  COLOURED PLATES

  'They reached the house where the light was burning'
        (see page 41)                                     _Frontispiece_

                                                            FACING PAGE

  'The most beautiful sight he had ever seen'                        16

  'All that remained for the youngest was the cat'                   21

  '"You must die, madam," he said'                                   99

  'Every evening the Beast paid her a visit'                        130

  '"Could your father but see you, my poor child"'                  152


  BLACK-AND-WHITE ILLUSTRATIONS

                                                                   PAGE

  'The king ... at once published an edict'                           3

  'A little dwarf who had a pair of seven-league boots'               7

  'The king's son chanced to go a-hunting'                           10

  'All asleep'                                                       12

  'They all fell asleep'                                             13

  'As though he were dead'                                           23

  'The cat went on ahead'                                            26

  Puss in Boots                                                      27

  'Puss became a personage of great importance'                      31

  'A good dame opened the door'                                      37

  'He could smell fresh flesh'                                       43

  'He set off over the countryside'                                  47

  'Laden with all the ogre's wealth'                                 51

  'Lifting up the jug so that she might drink the more easily'       57

  'She could not set four china vases on the mantelpiece without
     breaking one of them'                                           63

  'Graceful and easy conversation'                                   65

  Ricky of the Tuft                                                  71

  'The haughtiest, proudest woman that had ever been seen'           77

  'Her godmother found her in tears'                                 81

  'Away she went'                                                    83

  'She rose and fled as nimbly as a fawn'                            85

  'They tried it first on the princesses'                            89

  Little Red Riding Hood                                             93

  'She met old Father Wolf'                                          95

  'Making nosegays of the wild flowers'                              96

  'Come up on the bed with me'                                       97

  Blue Beard                                                        101

  'She washed it well'                                              104

  Sister Anne                                                       105

  'Brandishing the cutlass aloft'                                   109

  'At first she found it very hard'                                 115

  '"Look at our little sister"'                                     117

  'It was snowing horribly'                                         119

  The Beast                                                         122

  '"Your doom is to become statues"'                                135

  'The approach to it was by ten thousand steps'                    143

  The Friendly Frog                                                 146

  'The journey lasted seven years'                                  155

  Princess Rosette                                                  179

  The wicked nurse                                                  186

  'She was an ugly little fright'                                   189

  'She floated hither and thither'                                  194

  'A kindly old man'                                                195




[Illustration: Decoration]




THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD


Once upon a time there lived a king and queen who were grieved, more
grieved than words can tell, because they had no children. They tried
the waters of every country, made vows and pilgrimages, and did
everything that could be done, but without result. At last, however, the
queen found that her wishes were fulfilled, and in due course she gave
birth to a daughter.

A grand christening was held, and all the fairies that could be found in
the realm (they numbered seven in all) were invited to be godmothers to
the little princess. This was done so that by means of the gifts which
each in turn would bestow upon her (in accordance with the fairy custom
of those days) the princess might be endowed with every imaginable
perfection.

When the christening ceremony was over, all the company returned to the
king's palace, where a great banquet was held in honour of the fairies.
Places were laid for them in magnificent style, and before each was
placed a solid gold casket containing a spoon, fork, and knife of fine
gold, set with diamonds and rubies. But just as all were sitting down to
table an aged fairy was seen to enter, whom no one had thought to
invite--the reason being that for more than fifty years she had never
quitted the tower in which she lived, and people had supposed her to be
dead or bewitched.

By the king's orders a place was laid for her, but it was impossible to
give her a golden casket like the others, for only seven had been made
for the seven fairies. The old creature believed that she was
intentionally slighted, and muttered threats between her teeth.

She was overheard by one of the young fairies, who was seated near by.
The latter, guessing that some mischievous gift might be bestowed upon
the little princess, hid behind the tapestry as soon as the company left
the table. Her intention was to be the last to speak, and so to have the
power of counteracting, as far as possible, any evil which the old fairy
might do.

Presently the fairies began to bestow their gifts upon the princess. The
youngest ordained that she should be the most beautiful person in the
world; the next, that she should have the temper of an angel; the third,
that she should do everything with wonderful grace; the fourth, that she
should dance to perfection; the fifth, that she should sing like a
nightingale; and the sixth, that she should play every kind of music
with the utmost skill.

It was now the turn of the aged fairy. Shaking her head, in token of
spite rather than of infirmity, she declared that the princess should
prick her hand with a spindle, and die of it. A shudder ran through the
company at this terrible gift. All eyes were filled with tears.

But at this moment the young fairy stepped forth from behind the
tapestry.

'Take comfort, your Majesties,' she cried in a loud voice; 'your
daughter shall not die. My power, it is true, is not enough to undo all
that my aged kinswoman has decreed: the princess will indeed prick her
hand with a spindle. But instead of dying she shall merely fall into
a profound slumber that will last a hundred years. At the end of that
time a king's son shall come to awaken her.'

[Illustration: '_The king ... at once published an edict_']

The king, in an attempt to avert the unhappy doom pronounced by the old
fairy, at once published an edict forbidding all persons, under pain of
death, to use a spinning-wheel or keep a spindle in the house.

At the end of fifteen or sixteen years the king and queen happened one
day to be away, on pleasure bent. The princess was running about the
castle, and going upstairs from room to room she came at length to a
garret at the top of a tower, where an old serving-woman sat alone with
her distaff, spinning. This good woman had never heard speak of the
king's proclamation forbidding the use of spinning-wheels.

'What are you doing, my good woman?' asked the princess.

'I am spinning, my pretty child,' replied the dame, not knowing who she
was.

'Oh, what fun!' rejoined the princess; 'how do you do it? Let me try and
see if I can do it equally well.'

Partly because she was too hasty, partly because she was a little
heedless, but also because the fairy decree had ordained it, no sooner
had she seized the spindle than she pricked her hand and fell down in a
swoon.

In great alarm the good dame cried out for help. People came running
from every quarter to the princess. They threw water on her face, chafed
her with their hands, and rubbed her temples with the royal essence of
Hungary. But nothing would restore her.

Then the king, who had been brought upstairs by the commotion,
remembered the fairy prophecy. Feeling certain that what had happened
was inevitable, since the fairies had decreed it, he gave orders that
the princess should be placed in the finest apartment in the palace,
upon a bed embroidered in gold and silver.

You would have thought her an angel, so fair was she to behold. The
trance had not taken away the lovely colour of her complexion. Her
cheeks were delicately flushed, her lips like coral. Her eyes, indeed,
were closed, but her gentle breathing could be heard, and it was
therefore plain that she was not dead. The king commanded that she
should be left to sleep in peace until the hour of her awakening should
come.

When the accident happened to the princess, the good fairy who had saved
her life by condemning her to sleep a hundred years was in the kingdom
of Mataquin, twelve thousand leagues away. She was instantly warned of
it, however, by a little dwarf who had a pair of seven-league boots,
which are boots that enable one to cover seven leagues at a single step.
The fairy set off at once, and within an hour her chariot of fire, drawn
by dragons, was seen approaching.

The king handed her down from her chariot, and she approved of all that
he had done. But being gifted with great powers of foresight, she
bethought herself that when the princess came to be awakened, she would
be much distressed to find herself all alone in the old castle. And this
is what she did.

[Illustration: '_A little dwarf who had a pair of seven-league boots_']

She touched with her wand everybody (except the king and queen) who was
in the castle--governesses, maids of honour, ladies-in-waiting,
gentlemen, officers, stewards, cooks, scullions, errand boys, guards,
porters, pages, footmen. She touched likewise all the horses in the
stables, with their grooms, the big mastiffs in the courtyard, and
little Puff, the pet dog of the princess, who was lying on the bed
beside his mistress. The moment she had touched them they all fell
asleep, to awaken only at the same moment as their mistress. Thus they
would always be ready with their service whenever she should require it.
The very spits before the fire, loaded with partridges and pheasants,
subsided into slumber, and the fire as well. All was done in a moment,
for the fairies do not take long over their work.

Then the king and queen kissed their dear child, without waking her, and
left the castle. Proclamations were issued, forbidding any approach to
it, but these warnings were not needed, for within a quarter of an hour
there grew up all round the park so vast a quantity of trees big and
small, with interlacing brambles and thorns, that neither man nor beast
could penetrate them. The tops alone of the castle towers could be seen,
and these only from a distance. Thus did the fairy's magic contrive that
the princess, during all the time of her slumber, should have nought
whatever to fear from prying eyes.

At the end of a hundred years the throne had passed to another family
from that of the sleeping princess. One day the king's son chanced to go
a-hunting that way, and seeing in the distance some towers in the midst
of a large and dense forest, he asked what they were. His attendants
told him in reply the various stories which they had heard. Some said
there was an old castle haunted by ghosts, others that all the witches
of the neighbourhood held their revels there. The favourite tale was
that in the castle lived an ogre, who carried thither all the children
whom he could catch. There he devoured them at his leisure, and since he
was the only person who could force a passage through the wood nobody
had been able to pursue him.

[Illustration: '_The king's son chanced to go a-hunting_']

While the prince was wondering what to believe, an old peasant took up
the tale.

'Your Highness,' said he, 'more than fifty years ago I heard my father
say that in this castle lies a princess, the most beautiful that has
ever been seen. It is her doom to sleep there for a hundred years, and
then to be awakened by a king's son, for whose coming she waits.'

This story fired the young prince. He jumped immediately to the
conclusion that it was for him to see so gay an adventure through, and
impelled alike by the wish for love and glory, he resolved to set about
it on the spot.

Hardly had he taken a step towards the wood when the tall trees, the
brambles and the thorns, separated of themselves and made a path for
him. He turned in the direction of the castle, and espied it at the end
of a long avenue. This avenue he entered, and was surprised to notice
that the trees closed up again as soon as he had passed, so that none of
his retinue were able to follow him. A young and gallant prince is
always brave, however; so he continued on his way, and presently reached
a large fore-court.

The sight that now met his gaze was enough to fill him with an icy fear.
The silence of the place was dreadful, and death seemed all about him.
The recumbent figures of men and animals had all the appearance of being
lifeless, until he perceived by the pimply noses and ruddy faces of the
porters that they merely slept. It was plain, too, from their glasses,
in which were still some dregs of wine, that they had fallen asleep
while drinking.

The prince made his way into a great courtyard, paved with marble, and
mounting the staircase entered the guardroom. Here the guards were lined
up on either side in two ranks, their muskets on their shoulders,
snoring their hardest. Through several apartments crowded with ladies
and gentlemen in waiting, some seated, some standing, but all asleep, he
pushed on, and so came at last to a chamber which was decked all over
with gold. There he encountered the most beautiful sight he had ever
seen. Reclining upon a bed, the curtains of which on every side were
drawn back, was a princess of seemingly some fifteen or sixteen summers,
whose radiant beauty had an almost unearthly lustre.

[Illustration: '_All asleep_']

Trembling in his admiration he drew near and went on his knees beside
her. At the same moment, the hour of disenchantment having come, the
princess awoke, and bestowed upon him a look more tender than a first
glance might seem to warrant.

'Is it you, dear prince?' she said; 'you have been long in coming!'

Charmed by these words, and especially by the manner in which they were
said, the prince scarcely knew how to express his delight and
gratification. He declared that he loved her better than he loved
himself. His words were faltering, but they pleased the more for that.
The less there is of eloquence, the more there is of love.

Her embarrassment was less than his, and that is not to be wondered at,
since she had had time to think of what she would say to him. It seems
(although the story says nothing about it) that the good fairy had
beguiled her long slumber with pleasant dreams. To be brief, after four
hours of talking they had not succeeded in uttering one half of the
things they had to say to each other.

[Illustration: '_They all fell asleep_']

Now the whole palace had awakened with the princess. Every one went
about his business, and since they were not all in love they presently
began to feel mortally hungry. The lady-in-waiting, who was suffering
like the rest, at length lost patience, and in a loud voice called out
to the princess that supper was served.

The princess was already fully dressed, and in most magnificent style.
As he helped her to rise, the prince refrained from telling her that her
clothes, with the straight collar which she wore, were like those to
which his grandmother had been accustomed. And in truth, they in no way
detracted from her beauty.

They passed into an apartment hung with mirrors, and were there served
with supper by the stewards of the household, while the fiddles and
oboes played some old music--and played it remarkably well, considering
they had not played at all for just upon a hundred years. A little
later, when supper was over, the chaplain married them in the castle
chapel, and in due course, attended by the courtiers in waiting, they
retired to rest.

They slept but little, however. The princess, indeed, had not much need
of sleep, and as soon as morning came the prince took his leave of her.
He returned to the city, and told his father, who was awaiting him with
some anxiety, that he had lost himself while hunting in the forest, but
had obtained some black bread and cheese from a charcoal-burner, in
whose hovel he had passed the night. His royal father, being of an
easy-going nature, believed the tale, but his mother was not so easily
hoodwinked. She noticed that he now went hunting every day, and that he
always had an excuse handy when he had slept two or three nights from
home. She felt certain, therefore, that he had some love affair.

Two whole years passed since the marriage of the prince and princess,
and during that time they had two children. The first, a daughter, was
called 'Dawn,' while the second, a boy, was named 'Day,' because he
seemed even more beautiful than his sister.

Many a time the queen told her son that he ought to settle down in life.
She tried in this way to make him confide in her, but he did not dare to
trust her with his secret. Despite the affection which he bore her, he
was afraid of his mother, for she came of a race of ogres, and the king
had only married her for her wealth.

It was whispered at the Court that she had ogrish instincts, and that
when little children were near her she had the greatest difficulty in
the world to keep herself from pouncing on them.

No wonder the prince was reluctant to say a word.

But at the end of two years the king died, and the prince found himself
on the throne. He then made public announcement of his marriage, and
went in state to fetch his royal consort from her castle. With her two
children beside her she made a triumphal entry into the capital of her
husband's realm.

Some time afterwards the king declared war on his neighbour, the Emperor
Cantalabutte. He appointed the queen-mother as regent in his absence,
and entrusted his wife and children to her care.

[Illustration: "THE MOST BEAUTIFUL SIGHT HE HAD EVER SEEN."]

He expected to be away at the war for the whole of the summer, and as
soon as he was gone the queen-mother sent her daughter-in-law and the
two children to a country mansion in the forest. This she did that
she might be able the more easily to gratify her horrible longings. A
few days later she went there herself, and in the evening summoned the
chief steward.

'For my dinner to-morrow,' she told him, 'I will eat little Dawn.'

'Oh, Madam!' exclaimed the steward.

'That is my will,' said the queen; and she spoke in the tones of an ogre
who longs for raw meat.

'You will serve her with piquant sauce,' she added.

The poor man, seeing plainly that it was useless to trifle with an
ogress, took his big knife and went up to little Dawn's chamber. She was
at that time four years old, and when she came running with a smile to
greet him, flinging her arms round his neck and coaxing him to give her
some sweets, he burst into tears, and let the knife fall from his hand.

Presently he went down to the yard behind the house, and slaughtered a
young lamb. For this he made so delicious a sauce that his mistress
declared she had never eaten anything so good.

At the same time the steward carried little Dawn to his wife, and bade
the latter hide her in the quarters which they had below the yard.

Eight days later the wicked queen summoned her steward again.

'For my supper,' she announced, 'I will eat little Day.'

The steward made no answer, being determined to trick her as he had done
previously. He went in search of little Day, whom he found with a tiny
foil in his hand, making brave passes--though he was but three years
old--at a big monkey. He carried him off to his wife, who stowed him
away in hiding with little Dawn. To the ogress the steward served up, in
place of Day, a young kid so tender that she found it surpassingly
delicious.

So far, so good. But there came an evening when this evil queen again
addressed the steward.

'I have a mind,' she said, 'to eat the queen with the same sauce as you
served with her children.'

This time the poor steward despaired of being able to practise another
deception. The young queen was twenty years old, without counting the
hundred years she had been asleep. Her skin, though white and beautiful,
had become a little tough, and what animal could he possibly find that
would correspond to her? He made up his mind that if he would save his
own life he must kill the queen, and went upstairs to her apartment
determined to do the deed once and for all. Goading himself into a rage
he drew his knife and entered the young queen's chamber, but a
reluctance to give her no moment of grace made him repeat respectfully
the command which he had received from the queen-mother.

'Do it! do it!' she cried, baring her neck to him; 'carry out the order
you have been given! Then once more I shall see my children, my poor
children that I loved so much!'

Nothing had been said to her when the children were stolen away, and she
believed them to be dead.

The poor steward was overcome by compassion. 'No, no, Madam,' he
declared; 'you shall not die, but you shall certainly see your children
again. That will be in my quarters, where I have hidden them. I shall
make the queen eat a young hind in place of you, and thus trick her
once more.'

Without more ado he led her to his quarters, and leaving her there to
embrace and weep over her children, proceeded to cook a hind with such
art that the queen-mother ate it for her supper with as much appetite as
if it had indeed been the young queen.

The queen-mother felt well satisfied with her cruel deeds, and planned
to tell the king, on his return, that savage wolves had devoured his
consort and his children. It was her habit, however, to prowl often
about the courts and alleys of the mansion, in the hope of scenting raw
meat, and one evening she heard the little boy Day crying in a basement
cellar. The child was weeping because his mother had threatened to whip
him for some naughtiness, and she heard at the same time the voice of
Dawn begging forgiveness for her brother.

The ogress recognised the voices of the queen and her children, and was
enraged to find she had been tricked. The next morning, in tones so
affrighting that all trembled, she ordered a huge vat to be brought into
the middle of the courtyard. This she filled with vipers and toads, with
snakes and serpents of every kind, intending to cast into it the queen
and her children, and the steward with his wife and serving-girl. By her
command these were brought forward, with their hands tied behind their
backs.

There they were, and her minions were making ready to cast them into the
vat, when into the courtyard rode the king! Nobody had expected him so
soon, but he had travelled post-haste. Filled with amazement, he
demanded to know what this horrible spectacle meant. None dared tell
him, and at that moment the ogress, enraged at what confronted her,
threw herself head foremost into the vat, and was devoured on the
instant by the hideous creatures she had placed in it.

The king could not but be sorry, for after all she was his mother; but
it was not long before he found ample consolation in his beautiful wife
and children.




[Illustration: "ALL THAT REMAINED FOR THE YOUNGEST WAS THE CAT."]

PUSS IN BOOTS


A certain miller had three sons, and when he died the sole worldly goods
which he bequeathed to them were his mill, his ass, and his cat. This
little legacy was very quickly divided up, and you may be quite sure
that neither notary nor attorney were called in to help, for they would
speedily have grabbed it all for themselves.

The eldest son took the mill, and the second son took the ass.
Consequently all that remained for the youngest son was the cat, and he
was not a little disappointed at receiving such a miserable portion.

'My brothers,' said he, 'will be able to get a decent living by joining
forces, but for my part, as soon as I have eaten my cat and made a muff
out of his skin, I am bound to die of hunger.'

These remarks were overheard by Puss, who pretended not to have been
listening, and said very soberly and seriously:

'There is not the least need for you to worry, Master. All you have to
do is to give me a pouch, and get a pair of boots made for me so that I
can walk in the woods. You will find then that your share is not so bad
after all.'

Now this cat had often shown himself capable of performing cunning
tricks. When catching rats and mice, for example, he would hide himself
amongst the meal and hang downwards by the feet as though he were dead.
His master, therefore, though he did not build too much on what the cat
had said, felt some hope of being assisted in his miserable plight.

On receiving the boots which he had asked for, Puss gaily pulled them
on. Then he hung the pouch round his neck, and holding the cords which
tied it in front of him with his paws, he sallied forth to a warren
where rabbits abounded. Placing some bran and lettuce in the pouch, he
stretched himself out and lay as if dead. His plan was to wait until
some young rabbit, unlearned in worldly wisdom, should come and rummage
in the pouch for the eatables which he had placed there.

Hardly had he laid himself down when things fell out as he wished. A
stupid young rabbit went into the pouch, and Master Puss, pulling the
cords tight, killed him on the instant.

Well satisfied with his capture, Puss departed to the king's palace.
There he demanded an audience, and was ushered upstairs. He entered the
royal apartment, and bowed profoundly to the king.

'I bring you, Sire,' said he, 'a rabbit from the warren of the marquis
of Carabas (such was the title he invented for his master), which I am
bidden to present to you on his behalf.'

'Tell your master,' replied the king, 'that I thank him, and am pleased
by his attention.'

[Illustration: '_As though he were dead_']

Another time the cat hid himself in a wheatfield, keeping the mouth of
his bag wide open. Two partridges ventured in, and by pulling the cords
tight he captured both of them. Off he went and presented them to the
king, just as he had done with the rabbit from the warren. His
Majesty was not less gratified by the brace of partridges, and handed
the cat a present for himself.

For two or three months Puss went on in this way, every now and again
taking to the king, as a present from his master, some game which he had
caught. There came a day when he learned that the king intended to take
his daughter, who was the most beautiful princess in the world, for an
excursion along the river bank.

'If you will do as I tell you,' said Puss to his master, 'your fortune
is made. You have only to go and bathe in the river at the spot which I
shall point out to you. Leave the rest to me.'

The marquis of Carabas had no idea what plan was afoot, but did as the
cat had directed.

While he was bathing the king drew near, and Puss at once began to cry
out at the top of his voice:

'Help! help! the marquis of Carabas is drowning!'

At these shouts the king put his head out of the carriage window. He
recognised the cat who had so often brought him game, and bade his
escort go speedily to the help of the marquis of Carabas.

While they were pulling the poor marquis out of the river, Puss
approached the carriage and explained to the king that while his master
was bathing robbers had come and taken away his clothes, though he had
cried 'Stop, thief!' at the top of his voice. As a matter of fact, the
rascal had hidden them under a big stone. The king at once commanded the
keepers of his wardrobe to go and select a suit of his finest clothes
for the marquis of Carabas.

The king received the marquis with many compliments, and as the fine
clothes which the latter had just put on set off his good looks (for he
was handsome and comely in appearance), the king's daughter found him
very much to her liking. Indeed, the marquis of Carabas had not bestowed
more than two or three respectful but sentimental glances upon her when
she fell madly in love with him. The king invited him to enter the coach
and join the party.

[Illustration: '_The cat went on ahead_']

Delighted to see his plan so successfully launched, the cat went on
ahead, and presently came upon some peasants who were mowing a field.

'Listen, my good fellows,' said he; 'if you do not tell the king that
the field which you are mowing belongs to the marquis of Carabas, you
will all be chopped up into little pieces like mince-meat.'

[Illustration: _Puss in Boots_]

In due course the king asked the mowers to whom the field on which they
were at work belonged.

'It is the property of the marquis of Carabas,' they all cried with one
voice, for the threat from Puss had frightened them.

'You have inherited a fine estate,' the king remarked to Carabas.

'As you see for yourself, Sire,' replied the marquis; 'this is a meadow
which never fails to yield an abundant crop each year.'

Still travelling ahead, the cat came upon some harvesters.

'Listen, my good fellows,' said he; 'if you do not declare that every
one of these fields belongs to the marquis of Carabas, you will all be
chopped up into little bits like mince-meat.'

The king came by a moment later, and wished to know who was the owner of
the fields in sight.

'It is the marquis of Carabas,' cried the harvesters.

At this the king was more pleased than ever with the marquis.

Preceding the coach on its journey, the cat made the same threat to all
whom he met, and the king grew astonished at the great wealth of the
marquis of Carabas.

Finally Master Puss reached a splendid castle, which belonged to an
ogre. He was the richest ogre that had ever been known, for all the
lands through which the king had passed were part of the castle domain.

The cat had taken care to find out who this ogre was, and what powers he
possessed. He now asked for an interview, declaring that he was
unwilling to pass so close to the castle without having the honour of
paying his respects to the owner.

The ogre received him as civilly as an ogre can, and bade him sit down.

'I have been told,' said Puss, 'that you have the power to change
yourself into any kind of animal--for example, that you can transform
yourself into a lion or an elephant.'

'That is perfectly true,' said the ogre, curtly; 'and just to prove it
you shall see me turn into a lion.'

Puss was so frightened on seeing a lion before him that he sprang on to
the roof--not without difficulty and danger, for his boots were not
meant for walking on the tiles.

Perceiving presently that the ogre had abandoned his transformation,
Puss descended, and owned to having been thoroughly frightened.

'I have also been told,' he added, 'but I can scarcely believe it, that
you have the further power to take the shape of the smallest
animals--for example, that you can change yourself into a rat or a
mouse. I confess that to me it seems quite impossible.'

'Impossible?' cried the ogre; 'you shall see!' And in the same moment he
changed himself into a mouse, which began to run about the floor. No
sooner did Puss see it than he pounced on it and ate it.

Presently the king came along, and noticing the ogre's beautiful mansion
desired to visit it. The cat heard the rumble of the coach as it crossed
the castle drawbridge, and running out to the courtyard cried to the
king:

'Welcome, your Majesty, to the castle of the marquis of Carabas!'

[Illustration: '_Puss became a personage of great importance_']

'What's that?' cried the king. 'Is this castle also yours, marquis?
Nothing could be finer than this courtyard and the buildings which I see
all about. With your permission we will go inside and look round.'

The marquis gave his hand to the young princess, and followed the king
as he led the way up the staircase. Entering a great hall they found
there a magnificent collation. This had been prepared by the ogre for
some friends who were to pay him a visit that very day. The latter had
not dared to enter when they learned that the king was there.

The king was now quite as charmed with the excellent qualities of the
marquis of Carabas as his daughter. The latter was completely captivated
by him. Noting the great wealth of which the marquis was evidently
possessed, and having quaffed several cups of wine, he turned to his
host, saying:

'It rests with you, marquis, whether you will be my son-in-law.'

The marquis, bowing very low, accepted the honour which the king
bestowed upon him. The very same day he married the princess.

Puss became a personage of great importance, and gave up hunting mice,
except for amusement.

[Illustration: Decoration]




LITTLE TOM THUMB


Once upon a time there lived a wood-cutter and his wife, who had seven
children, all boys. The eldest was only ten years old, and the youngest
was seven. People were astonished that the wood-cutter had had so many
children in so short a time, but the reason was that his wife delighted
in children, and never had less than two at a time.

They were very poor, and their seven children were a great tax on them,
for none of them was yet able to earn his own living. And they were
troubled also because the youngest was very delicate and could not speak
a word. They mistook for stupidity what was in reality a mark of good
sense.

This youngest boy was very little. At his birth he was scarcely bigger
than a man's thumb, and he was called in consequence 'Little Tom Thumb.'
The poor child was the scapegoat of the family, and got the blame for
everything. All the same, he was the sharpest and shrewdest of the
brothers, and if he spoke but little he listened much.

There came a very bad year, when the famine was so great that these poor
people resolved to get rid of their family. One evening, after the
children had gone to bed, the wood-cutter was sitting in the
chimney-corner with his wife. His heart was heavy with sorrow as he said
to her:

'It must be plain enough to you that we can no longer feed our
children. I cannot see them die of hunger before my eyes, and I have
made up my mind to take them to-morrow to the forest and lose them
there. It will be easy enough to manage, for while they are amusing
themselves by collecting faggots we have only to disappear without their
seeing us.'

'Ah!' cried the wood-cutter's wife, 'do you mean to say you are capable
of letting your own children be lost?'

In vain did her husband remind her of their terrible poverty; she could
not agree. She was poor, but she was their mother. In the end, however,
reflecting what a grief it would be to see them die of hunger, she
consented to the plan, and went weeping to bed.

Little Tom Thumb had heard all that was said. Having discovered, when in
bed, that serious talk was going on, he had got up softly, and had
slipped under his father's stool in order to listen without being seen.
He went back to bed, but did not sleep a wink for the rest of the night,
thinking over what he had better do. In the morning he rose very early
and went to the edge of a brook. There he filled his pockets with little
white pebbles and came quickly home again.

They all set out, and little Tom Thumb said not a word to his brothers
of what he knew.

They went into a forest which was so dense that when only ten paces
apart they could not see each other. The wood-cutter set about his work,
and the children began to collect twigs to make faggots. Presently the
father and mother, seeing them busy at their task, edged gradually away,
and then hurried off in haste along a little narrow footpath.

When the children found they were alone they began to cry and call out
with all their might. Little Tom Thumb let them cry, being confident
that they would get back home again. For on the way he had dropped the
little white stones which he carried in his pocket all along the path.

'Don't be afraid, brothers,' he said presently; 'our parents have left
us here, but I will take you home again. Just follow me.'

They fell in behind him, and he led them straight to their house by the
same path which they had taken to the forest. At first they dared not go
in, but placed themselves against the door, where they could hear
everything their father and mother were saying.

Now the wood-cutter and his wife had no sooner reached home than the
lord of the manor sent them a sum of ten crowns which had been owing
from him for a long time, and of which they had given up hope. This put
new life into them, for the poor creatures were dying of hunger.

The wood-cutter sent his wife off to the butcher at once, and as it was
such a long time since they had had anything to eat, she bought three
times as much meat as a supper for two required.

When they found themselves once more at table, the wood-cutter's wife
began to lament.

'Alas! where are our poor children now?' she said; 'they could make a
good meal off what we have over. Mind you, William, it was you who
wished to lose them: I declared over and over again that we should
repent it. What are they doing now in that forest? Merciful heavens,
perhaps the wolves have already eaten them! A monster you must be to
lose your children in this way!'

[Illustration: '_A good dame opened the door_']

At last the wood-cutter lost patience, for she repeated more than twenty
times that he would repent it, and that she had told him so. He
threatened to beat her if she did not hold her tongue.

It was not that the wood-cutter was less grieved than his wife, but she
browbeat him, and he was of the same opinion as many other people, who
like a woman to have the knack of saying the right thing, but not the
trick of being always in the right.

'Alas!' cried the wood-cutter's wife, bursting into tears, 'where are
now my children, my poor children?'

She said it once so loud that the children at the door heard it plainly.
Together they all called out:

'Here we are! Here we are!'

She rushed to open the door for them, and exclaimed, as she embraced
them:

'How glad I am to see you again, dear children! You must be very tired
and very hungry. And you, Peterkin, how muddy you are--come and let me
wash you!'

This Peterkin was her eldest son. She loved him more than all the others
because he was inclined to be red-headed, and she herself was rather
red.

They sat down at the table and ate with an appetite which it did their
parents good to see. They all talked at once, as they recounted the
fears they had felt in the forest.

The good souls were delighted to have their children with them again,
and the pleasure continued as long as the ten crowns lasted. But when
the money was all spent they relapsed into their former sadness. They
again resolved to lose the children, and to lead them much further away
than they had done the first time, so as to do the job thoroughly. But
though they were careful not to speak openly about it, their
conversation did not escape little Tom Thumb, who made up his mind to
get out of the situation as he had done on the former occasion.

But though he got up early to go and collect his little stones, he found
the door of the house doubly locked, and he could not carry out his
plan.

He could not think what to do until the wood-cutter's wife gave them
each a piece of bread for breakfast. Then it occurred to him to use the
bread in place of the stones, by throwing crumbs along the path which
they took, and he tucked it tight in his pocket.

Their parents led them into the thickest and darkest part of the forest,
and as soon as they were there slipped away by a side-path and left
them. This did not much trouble little Tom Thumb, for he believed he
could easily find the way back by means of the bread which he had
scattered wherever he walked. But to his dismay he could not discover a
single crumb. The birds had come along and eaten it all.

They were in sore trouble now, for with every step they strayed further,
and became more and more entangled in the forest. Night came on and a
terrific wind arose, which filled them with dreadful alarm. On every
side they seemed to hear nothing but the howling of wolves which were
coming to eat them up. They dared not speak or move.

In addition it began to rain so heavily that they were soaked to the
skin. At every step they tripped and fell on the wet ground, getting up
again covered with mud, not knowing what to do with their hands.

Little Tom Thumb climbed to the top of a tree, in an endeavour to see
something. Looking all about him he espied, far away on the other side
of the forest, a little light like that of a candle. He got down from
the tree, and was terribly disappointed to find that when he was on the
ground he could see nothing at all.

After they had walked some distance in the direction of the light,
however, he caught a glimpse of it again as they were nearing the edge
of the forest. At last they reached the house where the light was
burning, but not without much anxiety, for every time they had to go
down into a hollow they lost sight of it.

They knocked at the door, and a good dame opened to them. She asked them
what they wanted.

Little Tom Thumb explained that they were poor children who had lost
their way in the forest, and begged her, for pity's sake, to give them a
night's lodging.

Noticing what bonny children they all were, the woman began to cry.

'Alas, my poor little dears!' she said; 'you do not know the place you
have come to! Have you not heard that this is the house of an ogre who
eats little children?'

'Alas, madam!' answered little Tom Thumb, trembling like all the rest of
his brothers, 'what shall we do? One thing is very certain: if you do
not take us in, the wolves of the forest will devour us this very night,
and that being so we should prefer to be eaten by your husband. Perhaps
he may take pity on us, if you will plead for us.'

The ogre's wife, thinking she might be able to hide them from her
husband till the next morning, allowed them to come in, and put them to
warm near a huge fire, where a whole sheep was cooking on the spit for
the ogre's supper.

Just as they were beginning to get warm they heard two or three great
bangs at the door. The ogre had returned. His wife hid them quickly
under the bed and ran to open the door.

The first thing the ogre did was to ask whether supper was ready and the
wine opened. Then without ado he sat down to table. Blood was still
dripping from the sheep, but it seemed all the better to him for that.
He sniffed to right and left, declaring that he could smell fresh flesh.

'Indeed!' said his wife. 'It must be the calf which I have just dressed
that you smell.'

'_I smell fresh flesh_, I tell you,' shouted the ogre, eyeing his wife
askance; 'and there is something going on here which I do not
understand.'

With these words he got up from the table and went straight to the bed.

'Aha!' said he; 'so this is the way you deceive me, wicked woman that
you are! I have a very great mind to eat you too! It's lucky for you
that you are old and tough! I am expecting three ogre friends of mine to
pay me a visit in the next few days, and here is a tasty dish which will
just come in nicely for them!'

One after another he dragged the children out from under the bed.

[Illustration: '_He could smell fresh flesh_']

The poor things threw themselves on their knees, imploring mercy; but
they had to deal with the most cruel of all ogres. Far from pitying
them, he was already devouring them with his eyes, and repeating to
his wife that when cooked with a good sauce they would make most dainty
morsels.

Off he went to get a large knife, which he sharpened, as he drew near
the poor children, on a long stone in his left hand.

He had already seized one of them when his wife called out to him. 'What
do you want to do it now for?' she said; 'will it not be time enough
to-morrow?'

'Hold your tongue,' replied the ogre; 'they will be all the more
tender.'

'But you have such a lot of meat,' rejoined his wife; 'look, there are a
calf, two sheep, and half a pig.'

'You are right,' said the ogre; 'give them a good supper to fatten them
up, and take them to bed.'

The good woman was overjoyed and brought them a splendid supper; but the
poor little wretches were so cowed with fright that they could not eat.

As for the ogre, he went back to his drinking, very pleased to have such
good entertainment for his friends. He drank a dozen cups more than
usual, and was obliged to go off to bed early, for the wine had gone
somewhat to his head.

Now the ogre had seven daughters who as yet were only children. These
little ogresses all had the most lovely complexions, for, like their
father, they ate fresh meat. But they had little round grey eyes,
crooked noses, and very large mouths, with long and exceedingly sharp
teeth, set far apart. They were not so very wicked at present, but they
showed great promise, for already they were in the habit of killing
little children to suck their blood.

They had gone to bed early, and were all seven in a great bed, each with
a crown of gold upon her head.

In the same room there was another bed, equally large. Into this the
ogre's wife put the seven little boys, and then went to sleep herself
beside her husband.

Little Tom Thumb was fearful lest the ogre should suddenly regret that
he had not cut the throats of himself and his brothers the evening
before. Having noticed that the ogre's daughters all had golden crowns
upon their heads, he got up in the middle of the night and softly placed
his own cap and those of his brothers on their heads. Before doing so,
he carefully removed the crowns of gold, putting them on his own and his
brothers' heads. In this way, if the ogre were to feel like slaughtering
them that night he would mistake the girls for the boys, and _vice
versa_.

Things fell out just as he had anticipated. The ogre, waking up at
midnight, regretted that he had postponed till the morrow what he could
have done overnight. Jumping briskly out of bed, he seized his knife,
crying: 'Now then, let's see how the little rascals are; we won't make
the same mistake twice!'

He groped his way up to his daughters' room, and approached the bed in
which were the seven little boys. All were sleeping, with the exception
of little Tom Thumb, who was numb with fear when he felt the ogre's
hand, as it touched the head of each brother in turn, reach his own.

'Upon my word,' said the ogre, as he felt the golden crowns; 'a nice job
I was going to make of it! It is very evident that I drank a little too
much last night!'

Forthwith he went to the bed where his daughters were, and here he felt
the little boys' caps.

'Aha, here are the little scamps!' he cried; 'now for a smart bit of
work!'

[Illustration: '_He set off over the countryside_']

With these words, and without a moment's hesitation, he cut the throats
of his seven daughters, and well satisfied with his work went back to
bed beside his wife.

No sooner did little Tom Thumb hear him snoring than he woke up his
brothers, bidding them dress quickly and follow him. They crept quietly
down to the garden, and jumped from the wall. All through the night they
ran in haste and terror, without the least idea of where they were
going.

When the ogre woke up he said to his wife:

'Go upstairs and dress those little rascals who were here last night.'

The ogre's wife was astonished at her husband's kindness, never doubting
that he meant her to go and put on their clothes. She went upstairs, and
was horrified to discover her seven daughters bathed in blood, with
their throats cut.

She fell at once into a swoon, which is the way of most women in similar
circumstances.

The ogre, thinking his wife was very long in carrying out his orders,
went up to help her, and was no less astounded than his wife at the
terrible spectacle which confronted him.

'What's this I have done?' he exclaimed. 'I will be revenged on the
wretches, and quickly, too!'

He threw a jugful of water over his wife's face, and having brought her
round ordered her to fetch his seven-league boots, so that he might
overtake the children.

He set off over the countryside, and strode far and wide until he came
to the road along which the poor children were travelling. They were not
more than a few yards from their home when they saw the ogre striding
from hill-top to hill-top, and stepping over rivers as though they were
merely tiny streams.

Little Tom Thumb espied near at hand a cave in some rocks. In this he
hid his brothers, and himself followed them in, while continuing to keep
a watchful eye upon the movements of the ogre.

Now the ogre was feeling very tired after so much fruitless marching
(for seven-league boots are very fatiguing to their wearer), and felt
like taking a little rest. As it happened, he went and sat down on the
very rock beneath which the little boys were hiding. Overcome with
weariness, he had not sat there long before he fell asleep and began to
snore so terribly that the poor children were as frightened as when he
had held his great knife to their throats.

Little Tom Thumb was not so alarmed. He told his brothers to flee at
once to their home while the ogre was still sleeping soundly, and not to
worry about him. They took his advice and ran quickly home.

Little Tom Thumb now approached the ogre and gently pulled off his
boots, which he at once donned himself. The boots were very heavy and
very large, but being enchanted boots they had the faculty of growing
larger or smaller according to the leg they had to suit. Consequently
they always fitted as though they had been made for the wearer.

He went straight to the ogre's house, where he found the ogre's wife
weeping over her murdered daughters.

[Illustration: '_Laden with all the ogre's wealth_']

'Your husband,' said little Tom Thumb, 'is in great danger, for he has
been captured by a gang of thieves, and the latter have sworn to kill
him if he does not hand over all his gold and silver. Just as they had
the dagger at his throat, he caught sight of me and begged me to come to
you and thus rescue him from his terrible plight. You are to give me
everything of value which he possesses, without keeping back a thing,
otherwise he will be slain without mercy. As the matter is urgent he
wished me to wear his seven-league boots, to save time, and also to
prove to you that I am no impostor.'

The ogre's wife, in great alarm, gave him immediately all that she had,
for although this was an ogre who devoured little children, he was by no
means a bad husband.

Little Tom Thumb, laden with all the ogre's wealth, forthwith repaired
to his father's house, where he was received with great joy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Many people do not agree about this last adventure, and pretend that
little Tom Thumb never committed this theft from the ogre, and only took
the seven-league boots, about which he had no compunction, since they
were only used by the ogre for catching little children. These folks
assert that they are in a position to know, having been guests at the
wood-cutter's cottage. They further say that when little Tom Thumb had
put on the ogre's boots, he went off to the Court, where he knew there
was great anxiety concerning the result of a battle which was being
fought by an army two hundred leagues away.

They say that he went to the king and undertook, if desired, to bring
news of the army before the day was out; and that the king promised him
a large sum of money if he could carry out his project.

Little Tom Thumb brought news that very night, and this first errand
having brought him into notice, he made as much money as he wished. For
not only did the king pay him handsomely to carry orders to the army,
but many ladies at the court gave him anything he asked to get them news
of their lovers, and this was his greatest source of income. He was
occasionally entrusted by wives with letters to their husbands, but they
paid him so badly, and this branch of the business brought him in so
little, that he did not even bother to reckon what he made from it.

After acting as courier for some time, and amassing great wealth
thereby, little Tom Thumb returned to his father's house, and was there
greeted with the greatest joy imaginable. He made all his family
comfortable, buying newly-created positions for his father and brothers.
In this way he set them all up, not forgetting at the same time to look
well after himself.




THE FAIRIES


Once upon a time there lived a widow with two daughters. The elder was
often mistaken for her mother, so like her was she both in nature and in
looks; parent and child being so disagreeable and arrogant that no one
could live with them.

The younger girl, who took after her father in the gentleness and
sweetness of her disposition, was also one of the prettiest girls
imaginable. The mother doted on the elder daughter--naturally enough,
since she resembled her so closely--and disliked the younger one as
intensely. She made the latter live in the kitchen and work hard from
morning till night.

One of the poor child's many duties was to go twice a day and draw water
from a spring a good half-mile away, bringing it back in a large
pitcher. One day when she was at the spring an old woman came up and
begged for a drink.

'Why, certainly, good mother,' the pretty lass replied. Rinsing her
pitcher, she drew some water from the cleanest part of the spring and
handed it to the dame, lifting up the jug so that she might drink the
more easily.

Now this old woman was a fairy, who had taken the form of a poor village
dame to see just how far the girl's good nature would go. 'You are so
pretty,' she said, when she had finished drinking, 'and so polite, that
I am determined to bestow a gift upon you. This is the boon I grant
you: with every word that you utter there shall fall from your mouth
either a flower or a precious stone.'

When the girl reached home she was scolded by her mother for being so
long in coming back from the spring.

'I am sorry to have been so long, mother,' said the poor child.

As she spoke these words there fell from her mouth three roses, three
pearls, and three diamonds.

'What's this?' cried her mother; 'did I see pearls and diamonds dropping
out of your mouth? What does this mean, dear daughter?' (This was the
first time she had ever addressed her daughter affectionately.)

The poor child told a simple tale of what had happened, and in speaking
scattered diamonds right and left.

'Really,' said her mother, 'I must send my own child there. Come here,
Fanchon; look what comes out of your sister's mouth whenever she speaks!
Wouldn't you like to be able to do the same? All you have to do is to go
and draw some water at the spring, and when a poor woman asks you for a
drink, give it her very nicely.'

'Oh, indeed!' replied the ill-mannered girl; 'don't you wish you may see
me going there!'

'I tell you that you are to go,' said her mother, 'and to go this
instant.'

[Illustration: '_Lifting up the jug so that she might drink the more
easily_']

Very sulkily the girl went off, taking with her the best silver flagon
in the house. No sooner had she reached the spring than she saw a lady,
magnificently attired, who came towards her from the forest, and asked
for a drink. This was the same fairy who had appeared to her sister,
masquerading now as a princess in order to see how far this girl's
ill-nature would carry her.

'Do you think I have come here just to get you a drink?' said the
loutish damsel, arrogantly. 'I suppose you think I brought a silver
flagon here specially for that purpose--it's so likely, isn't it? Drink
from the spring, if you want to!'

'You are not very polite,' said the fairy, displaying no sign of anger.
'Well, in return for your lack of courtesy I decree that for every word
you utter a snake or a toad shall drop out of your mouth.'

The moment her mother caught sight of her coming back she cried out,
'Well, daughter?'

'Well, mother?' replied the rude girl. As she spoke a viper and a toad
were spat out of her mouth.

'Gracious heavens!' cried her mother; 'what do I see? Her sister is the
cause of this, and I will make her pay for it!'

Off she ran to thrash the poor child, but the latter fled away and hid
in the forest near by. The king's son met her on his way home from
hunting, and noticing how pretty she was inquired what she was doing all
alone, and what she was weeping about.

'Alas, sir,' she cried; 'my mother has driven me from home!'

As she spoke the prince saw four or five pearls and as many diamonds
fall from her mouth. He begged her to tell him how this came about, and
she told him the whole story.

The king's son fell in love with her, and reflecting that such a gift as
had been bestowed upon her was worth more than any dowry which another
maiden might bring him, he took her to the palace of his royal father,
and there married her.

As for the sister, she made herself so hateful that even her mother
drove her out of the house. Nowhere could the wretched girl find any one
who would take her in, and at last she lay down in the forest and died.




RICKY OF THE TUFT


Once upon a time there was a queen who bore a son so ugly and misshapen
that for some time it was doubtful if he would have human form at all.
But a fairy who was present at his birth promised that he should have
plenty of brains, and added that by virtue of the gift which she had
just bestowed upon him he would be able to impart to the person whom he
should love best the same degree of intelligence which he possessed
himself.

This somewhat consoled the poor queen, who was greatly disappointed at
having brought into the world such a hideous brat. And indeed, no sooner
did the child begin to speak than his sayings proved to be full of
shrewdness, while all that he did was somehow so clever that he charmed
every one.

I forgot to mention that when he was born he had a little tuft of hair
upon his head. For this reason he was called Ricky of the Tuft, Ricky
being his family name.

Some seven or eight years later the queen of a neighbouring kingdom gave
birth to twin daughters. The first one to come into the world was more
beautiful than the dawn, and the queen was so overjoyed that it was
feared her great excitement might do her some harm. The same fairy who
had assisted at the birth of Ricky of the Tuft was present, and, in
order to moderate the transports of the queen she declared that this
little princess would have no sense at all, and would be as stupid as
she was beautiful.

The queen was deeply mortified, and a moment or two later her chagrin
became greater still, for the second daughter proved to be extremely
ugly.

'Do not be distressed, Madam,' said the fairy; 'your daughter shall be
recompensed in another way. She shall have so much good sense that her
lack of beauty will scarcely be noticed.'

'May Heaven grant it!' said the queen; 'but is there no means by which
the elder, who is so beautiful, can be endowed with some intelligence?'

'In the matter of brains I can do nothing for her, Madam,' said the
fairy, 'but as regards beauty I can do a great deal. As there is nothing
I would not do to please you, I will bestow upon her the power of making
beautiful any person who shall greatly please her.'

As the two princesses grew up their perfections increased, and
everywhere the beauty of the elder and the wit of the younger were the
subject of common talk.

It is equally true that their defects also increased as they became
older. The younger grew uglier every minute, and the elder daily became
more stupid. Either she answered nothing at all when spoken to, or
replied with some idiotic remark. At the same time she was so awkward
that she could not set four china vases on the mantelpiece without
breaking one of them, nor drink a glass of water without spilling half
of it over her clothes.

[Illustration: '_She could not set four china vases on the mantelpiece
without breaking one of them_']

Now although the elder girl possessed the great advantage which beauty
always confers upon youth, she was nevertheless outshone in almost all
company by her younger sister. At first every one gathered round the
beauty to see and admire her, but very soon they were all attracted by
the graceful and easy conversation of the clever one. In a very short
time the elder girl would be left entirely alone, while everybody
clustered round her sister.

[Illustration: '_Graceful and easy conversation_']

The elder princess was not so stupid that she was not aware of this, and
she would willingly have surrendered all her beauty for half her
sister's cleverness. Sometimes she was ready to die of grief, for the
queen, though a sensible woman, could not refrain from occasionally
reproaching her with her stupidity.

The princess had retired one day to a wood to bemoan her misfortune,
when she saw approaching her an ugly little man, of very disagreeable
appearance, but clad in magnificent attire.

This was the young prince Ricky of the Tuft. He had fallen in love with
her portrait, which was everywhere to be seen, and had left his father's
kingdom in order to have the pleasure of seeing and talking to her.

Delighted to meet her thus alone, he approached with every mark of
respect and politeness. But while he paid her the usual compliments he
noticed that she was plunged in melancholy.

'I cannot understand, madam,' he said, 'how any one with your beauty can
be so sad as you appear. I can boast of having seen many fair ladies,
and I declare that none of them could compare in beauty with you.'

'It is very kind of you to say so, sir,' answered the princess; and
stopped there, at a loss what to say further.

'Beauty,' said Ricky, 'is of such great advantage that everything else
can be disregarded; and I do not see that the possessor of it can have
anything much to grieve about.'

To this the princess replied:

'I would rather be as plain as you are and have some sense, than be as
beautiful as I am and at the same time stupid.'

'Nothing more clearly displays good sense, madam, than a belief that one
is not possessed of it. It follows, therefore, that the more one has,
the more one fears it to be wanting.'

'I am not sure about that,' said the princess; 'but I know only too well
that I am very stupid, and this is the reason of the misery which is
nearly killing me.'

'If that is all that troubles you, madam, I can easily put an end to
your suffering.'

'How will you manage that?' said the princess.

'I am able, madam,' said Ricky of the Tuft, 'to bestow as much good
sense as it is possible to possess on the person whom I love the most.
You are that person, and it therefore rests with you to decide whether
you will acquire so much intelligence. The only condition is that you
shall consent to marry me.'

The princess was dumbfounded, and remained silent.

'I can see,' pursued Ricky, 'that this suggestion perplexes you, and I
am not surprised. But I will give you a whole year to make up your mind
to it.'

The princess had so little sense, and at the same time desired it so
ardently, that she persuaded herself the end of this year would never
come. So she accepted the offer which had been made to her. No sooner
had she given her word to Ricky that she would marry him within one year
from that very day, than she felt a complete change come over her. She
found herself able to say all that she wished with the greatest ease,
and to say it in an elegant, finished, and natural manner. She at once
engaged Ricky in a brilliant and lengthy conversation, holding her own
so well that Ricky feared he had given her a larger share of sense than
he had retained for himself.

On her return to the palace amazement reigned throughout the Court at
such a sudden and extraordinary change. Whereas formerly they had been
accustomed to hear her give vent to silly, pert remarks, they now heard
her express herself sensibly and very wittily.

The entire Court was overjoyed. The only person not too pleased was the
younger sister, for now that she had no longer the advantage over the
elder in wit, she seemed nothing but a little fright in comparison.

The king himself often took her advice, and several times held his
councils in her apartment.

The news of this change spread abroad, and the princes of the
neighbouring kingdoms made many attempts to captivate her. Almost all
asked her in marriage. But she found none with enough sense, and so she
listened to all without promising herself to any.

At last came one who was so powerful, so rich, so witty, and so
handsome, that she could not help being somewhat attracted by him. Her
father noticed this, and told her she could make her own choice of a
husband: she had only to declare herself.

Now the more sense one has, the more difficult it is to make up one's
mind in an affair of this kind. After thanking her father, therefore,
she asked for a little time to think it over.

In order to ponder quietly what she had better do she went to walk in a
wood--the very one, as it happened, where she encountered Ricky of the
Tuft.

While she walked, deep in thought, she heard beneath her feet a thudding
sound, as though many people were running busily to and fro. Listening
more attentively she heard voices. 'Bring me that boiler,' said one;
then another--'Put some wood on that fire!'

At that moment the ground opened, and she saw below what appeared to be
a large kitchen full of cooks and scullions, and all the train of
attendants which the preparation of a great banquet involves. A gang of
some twenty or thirty spit-turners emerged and took up their positions
round a very long table in a path in the wood. They all wore their
cook's caps on one side, and with their basting implements in their
hands they kept time together as they worked, to the lilt of a melodious
song.

The princess was astonished by this spectacle, and asked for whom their
work was being done.

'For Prince Ricky of the Tuft, madam,' said the foreman of the gang;
'his wedding is to-morrow.'

At this the princess was more surprised than ever. In a flash she
remembered that it was a year to the very day since she had promised to
marry Prince Ricky of the Tuft, and was taken aback by the recollection.
The reason she had forgotten was that when she made the promise she was
still without sense, and with the acquisition of that intelligence which
the prince had bestowed upon her, all memory of her former stupidities
had been blotted out.

She had not gone another thirty paces when Ricky of the Tuft appeared
before her, gallant and resplendent, like a prince upon his wedding day.

'As you see, madam,' he said, 'I keep my word to the minute. I do not
doubt that you have come to keep yours, and by giving me your hand to
make me the happiest of men.'

'I will be frank with you,' replied the princess. 'I have not yet made
up my mind on the point, and I am afraid I shall never be able to take
the decision you desire.'

'You astonish me, madam,' said Ricky of the Tuft.

'I can well believe it,' said the princess, 'and undoubtedly, if I had
to deal with a clown, or a man who lacked good sense, I should feel
myself very awkwardly situated. "A princess must keep her word," he
would say, "and you must marry me because you promised to!" But I am
speaking to a man of the world, of the greatest good sense, and I am
sure that he will listen to reason. As you are aware, I could not make
up my mind to marry you even when I was entirely without sense; how can
you expect that to-day, possessing the intelligence you bestowed on me,
which makes me still more difficult to please than formerly, I should
take a decision which I could not take then? If you wished so much to
marry me, you were very wrong to relieve me of my stupidity, and to let
me see more clearly than I did.'

'If a man who lacked good sense,' replied Ricky of the Tuft, 'would be
justified, as you have just said, in reproaching you for breaking your
word, why do you expect, madam, that I should act differently where the
happiness of my whole life is at stake? Is it reasonable that people who
have sense should be treated worse than those who have none? Would you
maintain that for a moment--you, who so markedly have sense, and desired
so ardently to have it? But, pardon me, let us get to the facts. With
the exception of my ugliness, is there anything about me which
displeases you? Are you dissatisfied with my breeding, my brains, my
disposition, or my manners?'

'In no way,' replied the princess; 'I like exceedingly all that you have
displayed of the qualities you mention.'

'In that case,' said Ricky of the Tuft, 'happiness will be mine, for it
lies in your power to make me the most attractive of men.'

'How can that be done?' asked the princess.

[Illustration: _Ricky of the Tuft_]

'It will happen of itself,' replied Ricky of the Tuft, 'if you love me
well enough to wish that it be so. To remove your doubts, madam, let me
tell you that the same fairy who on the day of my birth bestowed upon
me the power of endowing with intelligence the woman of my choice, gave
to you also the power of endowing with beauty the man whom you should
love, and on whom you should wish to confer this favour.'

'If that is so,' said the princess, 'I wish with all my heart that you
may become the handsomest and most attractive prince in the world, and I
give you without reserve the boon which it is mine to bestow.'

No sooner had the princess uttered these words than Ricky of the Tuft
appeared before her eyes as the handsomest, most graceful and attractive
man that she had ever set eyes on.

Some people assert that this was not the work of fairy enchantment, but
that love alone brought about the transformation. They say that the
princess, as she mused upon her lover's constancy, upon his good sense,
and his many admirable qualities of heart and head, grew blind to the
deformity of his body and the ugliness of his face; that his hump back
seemed no more than was natural in a man who could make the courtliest
of bows, and that the dreadful limp which had formerly distressed her
now betokened nothing more than a certain diffidence and charming
deference of manner. They say further that she found his eyes shine all
the brighter for their squint, and that this defect in them was to her
but a sign of passionate love; while his great red nose she found nought
but martial and heroic.

However that may be, the princess promised to marry him on the spot,
provided only that he could obtain the consent of her royal father.

The king knew Ricky of the Tuft to be a prince both wise and witty, and
on learning of his daughter's regard for him, he accepted him with
pleasure as a son-in-law.

The wedding took place upon the morrow, just as Ricky of the Tuft had
foreseen, and in accordance with the arrangements he had long ago put in
train.




CINDERELLA


Once upon a time there was a worthy man who married for his second wife
the haughtiest, proudest woman that had ever been seen. She had two
daughters, who possessed their mother's temper and resembled her in
everything. Her husband, on the other hand, had a young daughter, who
was of an exceptionally sweet and gentle nature. She got this from her
mother, who had been the nicest person in the world.

The wedding was no sooner over than the stepmother began to display her
bad temper. She could not endure the excellent qualities of this young
girl, for they made her own daughters appear more hateful than ever. She
thrust upon her all the meanest tasks about the house. It was she who
had to clean the plates and the stairs, and sweep out the rooms of the
mistress of the house and her daughters. She slept on a wretched
mattress in a garret at the top of the house, while the sisters had
rooms with parquet flooring, and beds of the most fashionable style,
with mirrors in which they could see themselves from top to toe.

The poor girl endured everything patiently, not daring to complain to
her father. The latter would have scolded her, because he was entirely
ruled by his wife. When she had finished her work she used to sit
amongst the cinders in the corner of the chimney, and it was from this
habit that she came to be commonly known as Cinder-slut. The younger of
the two sisters, who was not quite so spiteful as the elder, called her
Cinderella. But her wretched clothes did not prevent Cinderella from
being a hundred times more beautiful than her sisters, for all their
resplendent garments.

It happened that the king's son gave a ball, and he invited all persons
of high degree. The two young ladies were invited amongst others, for
they cut a considerable figure in the country. Not a little pleased were
they, and the question of what clothes and what mode of dressing the
hair would become them best took up all their time. And all this meant
fresh trouble for Cinderella, for it was she who went over her sisters'
linen and ironed their ruffles. They could talk of nothing else but the
fashions in clothes.

'For my part,' said the elder, 'I shall wear my dress of red velvet,
with the Honiton lace.'

'I have only my everyday petticoat,' said the younger, 'but to make up
for it I shall wear my cloak with the golden flowers and my necklace of
diamonds, which are not so bad.'

They sent for a good hairdresser to arrange their double-frilled caps,
and bought patches at the best shop.

They summoned Cinderella and asked her advice, for she had good taste.
Cinderella gave them the best possible suggestions, and even offered to
dress their hair, to which they gladly agreed.

While she was thus occupied they said:

'Cinderella, would you not like to go to the ball?'

'Ah, but you fine young ladies are laughing at me. It would be no place
for me.'

[Illustration: '_The haughtiest, proudest woman that had ever been
seen_']

'That is very true, people would laugh to see a cinder-slut in the
ballroom.'

Any one else but Cinderella would have done their hair amiss, but she
was good-natured, and she finished them off to perfection. They were so
excited in their glee that for nearly two days they ate nothing. They
broke more than a dozen laces through drawing their stays tight in order
to make their waists more slender, and they were perpetually in front of
a mirror.

At last the happy day arrived. Away they went, Cinderella watching them
as long as she could keep them in sight. When she could no longer see
them she began to cry. Her godmother found her in tears, and asked what
was troubling her.

'I should like--I should like----'

She was crying so bitterly that she could not finish the sentence.

Said her godmother, who was a fairy:

'You would like to go to the ball, would you not?'

'Ah, yes,' said Cinderella, sighing.

'Well, well,' said her godmother, 'promise to be a good girl and I will
arrange for you to go.'

She took Cinderella into her room and said:

'Go into the garden and bring me a pumpkin.'

Cinderella went at once and gathered the finest that she could find.
This she brought to her godmother, wondering how a pumpkin could help in
taking her to the ball.

Her godmother scooped it out, and when only the rind was left, struck it
with her wand. Instantly the pumpkin was changed into a beautiful coach,
gilded all over.

Then she went and looked in the mouse-trap, where she found six mice
all alive. She told Cinderella to lift the door of the mouse-trap a
little, and as each mouse came out she gave it a tap with her wand,
whereupon it was transformed into a fine horse. So that here was a fine
team of six dappled mouse-grey horses.

But she was puzzled to know how to provide a coachman.

'I will go and see,' said Cinderella, 'if there is not a rat in the
rat-trap. We could make a coachman of him.'

'Quite right,' said her godmother, 'go and see.'

Cinderella brought in the rat-trap, which contained three big rats. The
fairy chose one specially on account of his elegant whiskers.

As soon as she had touched him he turned into a fat coachman with the
finest moustachios that ever were seen.

'Now go into the garden and bring me the six lizards which you will find
behind the water-butt.'

No sooner had they been brought than the godmother turned them into six
lackeys, who at once climbed up behind the coach in their braided
liveries, and hung on there as if they had never done anything else all
their lives.

Then said the fairy godmother:

'Well, there you have the means of going to the ball. Are you
satisfied?'

'Oh, yes, but am I to go like this in my ugly clothes?'

Her godmother merely touched her with her wand, and on the instant her
clothes were changed into garments of gold and silver cloth, bedecked
with jewels. After that her godmother gave her a pair of glass slippers,
the prettiest in the world.

[Illustration: '_Her godmother found her in tears_']

Thus altered, she entered the coach. Her godmother bade her not to stay
beyond midnight whatever happened, warning her that if she remained
at the ball a moment longer, her coach would again become a pumpkin, her
horses mice, and her lackeys lizards, while her old clothes would
reappear upon her once more.

She promised her godmother that she would not fail to leave the ball
before midnight, and away she went, beside herself with delight.

[Illustration: '_Away she went_']

The king's son, when he was told of the arrival of a great princess whom
nobody knew, went forth to receive her. He handed her down from the
coach, and led her into the hall where the company was assembled. At
once there fell a great silence. The dancers stopped, the violins played
no more, so rapt was the attention which everybody bestowed upon the
superb beauty of the unknown guest. Everywhere could be heard in
confused whispers:

'Oh, how beautiful she is!'

The king, old man as he was, could not take his eyes off her, and
whispered to the queen that it was many a long day since he had seen any
one so beautiful and charming.

All the ladies were eager to scrutinise her clothes and the dressing of
her hair, being determined to copy them on the morrow, provided they
could find materials so fine, and tailors so clever.

The king's son placed her in the seat of honour, and at once begged the
privilege of being her partner in a dance. Such was the grace with which
she danced that the admiration of all was increased.

A magnificent supper was served, but the young prince could eat nothing,
so taken up was he with watching her. She went and sat beside her
sisters, and bestowed numberless attentions upon them. She made them
share with her the oranges and lemons which the king had given
her--greatly to their astonishment, for they did not recognise her.

While they were talking, Cinderella heard the clock strike a quarter to
twelve. She at once made a profound curtsey to the company, and departed
as quickly as she could.

As soon as she was home again she sought out her godmother, and having
thanked her, declared that she wished to go upon the morrow once more to
the ball, because the king's son had invited her.

While she was busy telling her godmother all that had happened at the
ball, her two sisters knocked at the door. Cinderella let them in.

'What a long time you have been in coming!' she declared, rubbing her
eyes and stretching herself as if she had only just awakened. In real
truth she had not for a moment wished to sleep since they had left.

[Illustration: '_She rose and fled as nimbly as a fawn_']

'If you had been at the ball,' said one of the sisters, 'you would not
be feeling weary. There came a most beautiful princess, the most
beautiful that has ever been seen, and she bestowed numberless
attentions upon us, and gave us her oranges and lemons.'

Cinderella was overjoyed. She asked them the name of the princess, but
they replied that no one knew it, and that the king's son was so
distressed that he would give anything in the world to know who she was.

Cinderella smiled, and said she must have been beautiful indeed.

'Oh, how lucky you are. Could I not manage to see her? Oh, please,
Javotte, lend me the yellow dress which you wear every day.'

'Indeed!' said Javotte, 'that is a fine idea. Lend my dress to a grubby
cinder-slut like you--you must think me mad!'

Cinderella had expected this refusal. She was in no way upset, for she
would have been very greatly embarrassed had her sister been willing to
lend the dress.

The next day the two sisters went to the ball, and so did Cinderella,
even more splendidly attired than the first time.

The king's son was always at her elbow, and paid her endless
compliments.

The young girl enjoyed herself so much that she forgot her godmother's
bidding completely, and when the first stroke of midnight fell upon her
ears, she thought it was no more than eleven o'clock.

She rose and fled as nimbly as a fawn. The prince followed her, but
could not catch her. She let fall one of her glass slippers, however,
and this the prince picked up with tender care.

When Cinderella reached home she was out of breath, without coach,
without lackeys, and in her shabby clothes. Nothing remained of all her
splendid clothes save one of the little slippers, the fellow to the one
which she had let fall.

Inquiries were made of the palace doorkeepers as to whether they had
seen a princess go out, but they declared they had seen no one leave
except a young girl, very ill-clad, who looked more like a peasant than
a young lady.

When her two sisters returned from the ball, Cinderella asked them if
they had again enjoyed themselves, and if the beautiful lady had been
there. They told her that she was present, but had fled away when
midnight sounded, and in such haste that she had let fall one of her
little glass slippers, the prettiest thing in the world. They added that
the king's son, who picked it up, had done nothing but gaze at it for
the rest of the ball, from which it was plain that he was deeply in love
with its beautiful owner.

They spoke the truth. A few days later, the king's son caused a
proclamation to be made by trumpeters, that he would take for wife the
owner of the foot which the slipper would fit.

They tried it first on the princesses, then on the duchesses and the
whole of the Court, but in vain. Presently they brought it to the home
of the two sisters, who did all they could to squeeze a foot into the
slipper. This, however, they could not manage.

Cinderella was looking on and recognised her slipper:

'Let me see,' she cried, laughingly, 'if it will not fit me.'

[Illustration: '_They tried it first on the princesses_']

Her sisters burst out laughing, and began to gibe at her, but the
equerry who was trying on the slipper looked closely at Cinderella.
Observing that she was very beautiful he declared that the claim was
quite a fair one, and that his orders were to try the slipper on every
maiden. He bade Cinderella sit down, and on putting the slipper to her
little foot he perceived that the latter slid in without trouble, and
was moulded to its shape like wax.

Great was the astonishment of the two sisters at this, and greater still
when Cinderella drew from her pocket the other little slipper. This she
likewise drew on.

At that very moment her godmother appeared on the scene. She gave a tap
with her wand to Cinderella's clothes, and transformed them into a dress
even more magnificent than her previous ones.

The two sisters recognised her for the beautiful person whom they had
seen at the ball, and threw themselves at her feet, begging her pardon
for all the ill-treatment she had suffered at their hands.

Cinderella raised them, and declaring as she embraced them that she
pardoned them with all her heart, bade them to love her well in future.

She was taken to the palace of the young prince in all her new array. He
found her more beautiful than ever, and was married to her a few days
afterwards.

Cinderella was as good as she was beautiful. She set aside apartments in
the palace for her two sisters, and married them the very same day to
two gentlemen of high rank about the Court.




LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD


Once upon a time there was a little village girl, the prettiest that had
ever been seen. Her mother doted on her. Her grandmother was even
fonder, and made her a little red hood, which became her so well that
everywhere she went by the name of Little Red Riding Hood.

One day her mother, who had just made and baked some cakes, said to her:

'Go and see how your grandmother is, for I have been told that she is
ill. Take her a cake and this little pot of butter.'

Little Red Riding Hood set off at once for the house of her grandmother,
who lived in another village.

On her way through a wood she met old Father Wolf. He would have very
much liked to eat her, but dared not do so on account of some
wood-cutters who were in the forest. He asked her where she was going.
The poor child, not knowing that it was dangerous to stop and listen to
a wolf, said:

'I am going to see my grandmother, and am taking her a cake and a pot of
butter which my mother has sent to her.'

'Does she live far away?' asked the Wolf.

'Oh yes,' replied Little Red Riding Hood; 'it is yonder by the mill
which you can see right below there, and it is the first house in the
village.'

[Illustration: _Little Red Riding Hood_]

'Well now,' said the Wolf, 'I think I shall go and see her too. I will
go by this path, and you by that path, and we will see who gets there
first.'

[Illustration: '_She met old Father Wolf_']

The Wolf set off running with all his might by the shorter road, and the
little girl continued on her way by the longer road. As she went she
amused herself by gathering nuts, running after the butterflies, and
making nosegays of the wild flowers which she found.

The Wolf was not long in reaching the grandmother's house.

He knocked. _Toc Toc._

'Who is there?'

'It is your little daughter, Red Riding Hood,' said the Wolf, disguising
his voice, 'and I bring you a cake and a little pot of butter as a
present from my mother.'

[Illustration: '_Making nosegays of the wild flowers_']

The worthy grandmother was in bed, not being very well, and cried out to
him:

'Pull out the peg and the latch will fall.'

The Wolf drew out the peg and the door flew open. Then he sprang upon
the poor old lady and ate her up in less than no time, for he had been
more than three days without food.

After that he shut the door, lay down in the grandmother's bed, and
waited for Little Red Riding Hood.

Presently she came and knocked. _Toc Toc._

'Who is there?'

Now Little Red Riding Hood on hearing the Wolf's gruff voice was at
first frightened, but thinking that her grandmother had a bad cold, she
replied:

'It is your little daughter, Red Riding Hood, and I bring you a cake and
a little pot of butter from my mother.'

[Illustration: '_Come up on the bed with me_']

Softening his voice, the Wolf called out to her:

'Pull out the peg and the latch will fall.'

Little Red Riding Hood drew out the peg and the door flew open.

When he saw her enter, the Wolf hid himself in the bed beneath the
counterpane.

'Put the cake and the little pot of butter on the bin,' he said, 'and
come up on the bed with me.'

Little Red Riding Hood took off her clothes, but when she climbed up on
the bed she was astonished to see how her grandmother looked in her
nightgown.

'Grandmother dear!' she exclaimed, 'what big arms you have!'

'The better to embrace you, my child!'

'Grandmother dear, what big legs you have!'

'The better to run with, my child!'

'Grandmother dear, what big ears you have!'

'The better to hear with, my child!'

'Grandmother dear, what big eyes you have!'

'The better to see with, my child!'

'Grandmother dear, what big teeth you have!'

'The better to eat you with!'

With these words the wicked Wolf leapt upon Little Red Riding Hood and
gobbled her up.




[Illustration: "'YOU MUST DIE, MADAM,' HE SAID."]

BLUE BEARD


Once upon a time there was a man who owned splendid town and country
houses, gold and silver plate, tapestries and coaches gilt all over. But
the poor fellow had a blue beard, and this made him so ugly and
frightful that there was not a woman or girl who did not run away at
sight of him.

Amongst his neighbours was a lady of high degree who had two
surpassingly beautiful daughters. He asked for the hand of one of these
in marriage, leaving it to their mother to choose which should be
bestowed upon him. Both girls, however, raised objections, and his offer
was bandied from one to the other, neither being able to bring herself
to accept a man with a blue beard. Another reason for their distaste was
the fact that he had already married several wives, and no one knew what
had become of them.

In order that they might become better acquainted, Blue Beard invited
the two girls, with their mother and three or four of their best
friends, to meet a party of young men from the neighbourhood at one of
his country houses. Here they spent eight whole days, and throughout
their stay there was a constant round of picnics, hunting and fishing
expeditions, dances, dinners, and luncheons; and they never slept at
all, through spending all the night in playing merry pranks upon each
other. In short, everything went so gaily that the younger daughter
began to think the master of the house had not so very blue a beard
after all, and that he was an exceedingly agreeable man. As soon as the
party returned to town their marriage took place.

At the end of a month Blue Beard informed his wife that important
business obliged him to make a journey into a distant part of the
country, which would occupy at least six weeks. He begged her to amuse
herself well during his absence, and suggested that she should invite
some of her friends and take them, if she liked, to the country. He was
particularly anxious that she should enjoy herself thoroughly.

'Here,' he said, 'are the keys of the two large storerooms, and here is
the one that locks up the gold and silver plate which is not in everyday
use. This key belongs to the strong-boxes where my gold and silver is
kept, this to the caskets containing my jewels; while here you have the
master-key which gives admittance to all the apartments. As regards this
little key, it is the key of the small room at the end of the long
passage on the lower floor. You may open everything, you may go
everywhere, but I forbid you to enter this little room. And I forbid you
so seriously that if you were indeed to open the door, I should be so
angry that I might do anything.'

She promised to follow out these instructions exactly, and after
embracing her, Blue Beard steps into his coach and is off upon his
journey.

[Illustration: _Blue Beard_]

Her neighbours and friends did not wait to be invited before coming to
call upon the young bride, so great was their eagerness to see the
splendours of her house. They had not dared to venture while her
husband was there, for his blue beard frightened them. But in less than
no time there they were, running in and out of the rooms, the closets,
and the wardrobes, each of which was finer than the last. Presently they
went upstairs to the storerooms, and there they could not admire enough
the profusion and magnificence of the tapestries, beds, sofas, cabinets,
tables, and stands. There were mirrors in which they could view
themselves from top to toe, some with frames of plate glass, others with
frames of silver and gilt lacquer, that were the most superb and
beautiful things that had ever been seen. They were loud and persistent
in their envy of their friend's good fortune. She, on the other hand,
derived little amusement from the sight of all these riches, the reason
being that she was impatient to go and inspect the little room on the
lower floor.

So overcome with curiosity was she that, without reflecting upon the
discourtesy of leaving her guests, she ran down a private staircase, so
precipitately that twice or thrice she nearly broke her neck, and so
reached the door of the little room. There she paused for a while,
thinking of the prohibition which her husband had made, and reflecting
that harm might come to her as a result of disobedience. But the
temptation was so great that she could not conquer it. Taking the little
key, with a trembling hand she opened the door of the room.

At first she saw nothing, for the windows were closed, but after a few
moments she perceived dimly that the floor was entirely covered with
clotted blood, and that in this were reflected the dead bodies of
several women that hung along the walls. These were all the wives of
Blue Beard, whose throats he had cut, one after another.

She thought to die of terror, and the key of the room, which she had
just withdrawn from the lock, fell from her hand.

When she had somewhat regained her senses, she picked up the key, closed
the door, and went up to her chamber to compose herself a little. But
this she could not do, for her nerves were too shaken. Noticing that the
key of the little room was stained with blood, she wiped it two or three
times. But the blood did not go. She washed it well, and even rubbed it
with sand and grit. Always the blood remained. For the key was
bewitched, and there was no means of cleaning it completely. When the
blood was removed from one side, it reappeared on the other.

[Illustration: '_She washed it well_']

Blue Beard returned from his journey that very evening. He had received
some letters on the way, he said, from which he learned that the
business upon which he had set forth had just been concluded to his
satisfaction. His wife did everything she could to make it appear
that she was delighted by his speedy return.

[Illustration: _Sister Anne_]

On the morrow he demanded the keys. She gave them to him, but with so
trembling a hand that he guessed at once what had happened.

'How comes it,' he said to her, 'that the key of the little room is not
with the others?'

'I must have left it upstairs upon my table,' she said.

'Do not fail to bring it to me presently,' said Blue Beard.

After several delays the key had to be brought. Blue Beard examined it,
and addressed his wife.

'Why is there blood on this key?'

'I do not know at all,' replied the poor woman, paler than death.

'You do not know at all?' exclaimed Blue Beard; 'I know well enough. You
wanted to enter the little room! Well, madam, enter it you shall--you
shall go and take your place among the ladies you have seen there.'

She threw herself at her husband's feet, asking his pardon with tears,
and with all the signs of a true repentance for her disobedience. She
would have softened a rock, in her beauty and distress, but Blue Beard
had a heart harder than any stone.

'You must die, madam,' he said; 'and at once.'

'Since I must die,' she replied, gazing at him with eyes that were wet
with tears, 'give me a little time to say my prayers.'

'I give you one quarter of an hour,' replied Blue Beard, 'but not a
moment longer.'

When the poor girl was alone, she called her sister to her and said:

'Sister Anne'--for that was her name--'go up, I implore you, to the top
of the tower, and see if my brothers are not approaching. They promised
that they would come and visit me to-day. If you see them, make signs to
them to hasten.'

Sister Anne went up to the top of the tower, and the poor unhappy girl
cried out to her from time to time:

'Anne, Sister Anne, do you see nothing coming?'

And Sister Anne replied:

'I see nought but dust in the sun and the green grass growing.'

Presently Blue Beard, grasping a great cutlass, cried out at the top of
his voice:

'Come down quickly, or I shall come upstairs myself.'

'Oh please, one moment more,' called out his wife.

And at the same moment she cried in a whisper:

'Anne, Sister Anne, do you see nothing coming?'

'I see nought but dust in the sun and the green grass growing.'

'Come down at once, I say,' shouted Blue Beard, 'or I will come upstairs
myself.'

'I am coming,' replied his wife.

Then she called:

'Anne, Sister Anne, do you see nothing coming?'

'I see,' replied Sister Anne, 'a great cloud of dust which comes this
way.'

'Is it my brothers?'

'Alas, sister, no; it is but a flock of sheep.'

'Do you refuse to come down?' roared Blue Beard.

[Illustration: '_Brandishing the cutlass aloft_']

'One little moment more,' exclaimed his wife.

Once more she cried:

'Anne, Sister Anne, do you see nothing coming?'

'I see,' replied her sister, 'two horsemen who come this way, but they
are as yet a long way off.... Heaven be praised,' she exclaimed a moment
later, 'they are my brothers.... I am signalling to them all I can to
hasten.'

Blue Beard let forth so mighty a shout that the whole house shook. The
poor wife went down and cast herself at his feet, all dishevelled and in
tears.

'That avails you nothing,' said Blue Beard; 'you must die.'

Seizing her by the hair with one hand, and with the other brandishing
the cutlass aloft, he made as if to cut off her head.

The poor woman, turning towards him and fixing a dying gaze upon him,
begged for a brief moment in which to collect her thoughts.

'No! no!' he cried; 'commend your soul to Heaven.' And raising his
arm----

At this very moment there came so loud a knocking at the gate that Blue
Beard stopped short. The gate was opened, and two horsemen dashed in,
who drew their swords and rode straight at Blue Beard. The latter
recognised them as the brothers of his wife--one of them a dragoon, and
the other a musketeer--and fled instantly in an effort to escape. But
the two brothers were so close upon him that they caught him ere he
could gain the first flight of steps. They plunged their swords through
his body and left him dead. The poor woman was nearly as dead as her
husband, and had not the strength to rise and embrace her brothers.

It was found that Blue Beard had no heirs, and that consequently his
wife became mistress of all his wealth. She devoted a portion to
arranging a marriage between her sister Anne and a young gentleman with
whom the latter had been for some time in love, while another portion
purchased a captain's commission for each of her brothers. The rest
formed a dowry for her own marriage with a very worthy man, who banished
from her mind all memory of the evil days she had spent with Blue
Beard.




BEAUTY AND THE BEAST


Once upon a time there lived a merchant who was exceedingly rich. He had
six children--three boys and three girls--and being a sensible man he
spared no expense upon their education, but engaged tutors of every kind
for them. All his daughters were pretty, but the youngest especially was
admired by everybody. When she was small she was known simply as 'the
little beauty,' and this name stuck to her, causing a great deal of
jealousy on the part of her sisters.

This youngest girl was not only prettier than her sisters, but very much
nicer. The two elder girls were very arrogant as a result of their
wealth; they pretended to be great ladies, declining to receive the
daughters of other merchants, and associating only with people of
quality. Every day they went off to balls and theatres, and for walks in
the park, with many a gibe at their little sister, who spent much of her
time in reading good books.

Now these girls were known to be very rich, and in consequence were
sought in marriage by many prominent merchants. The two eldest said they
would never marry unless they could find a duke, or at least a count.
But Beauty--this, as I have mentioned, was the name by which the
youngest was known--very politely thanked all who proposed marriage to
her, and said that she was too young at present, and that she wished to
keep her father company for several years yet.

Suddenly the merchant lost his fortune, the sole property which remained
to him being a small house in the country, a long way from the capital.
With tears he broke it to his children that they would have to move to
this house, where by working like peasants they might just be able to
live.

The two elder girls replied that they did not wish to leave the town,
and that they had several admirers who would be only too happy to marry
them, notwithstanding their loss of fortune. But the simple maidens were
mistaken: their admirers would no longer look at them, now that they
were poor. Everybody disliked them on account of their arrogance, and
folks declared that they did not deserve pity: in fact, that it was a
good thing their pride had had a fall--a turn at minding sheep would
teach them how to play the fine lady! 'But we are very sorry for
Beauty's misfortune,' everybody added; 'she is such a dear girl, and was
always so considerate to poor people: so gentle, and with such charming
manners!'

There were even several worthy men who would have married her, despite
the fact that she was now penniless; but she told them she could not
make up her mind to leave her poor father in his misfortune, and that
she intended to go with him to the country, to comfort him and help him
to work. Poor Beauty had been very grieved at first over the loss of her
fortune, but she said to herself:

'However much I cry, I shall not recover my wealth, so I must try to be
happy without it.'

When they were established in the country the merchant and his family
started working on the land. Beauty used to rise at four o'clock in the
morning, and was busy all day looking after the house, and preparing
dinner for the family. At first she found it very hard, for she was not
accustomed to work like a servant, but at the end of a couple of months
she grew stronger, and her health was improved by the work. When she had
leisure she read, or played the harpsichord, or sang at her
spinning-wheel.

[Illustration: '_At first she found it very hard_']

Her two sisters, on the other hand, were bored to death; they did not
get up till ten o'clock in the morning, and they idled about all day.
Their only diversion was to bemoan the beautiful clothes they used to
wear and the company they used to keep. 'Look at our little sister,'
they would say to each other; 'her tastes are so low and her mind so
stupid that she is quite content with this miserable state of affairs.'

The good merchant did not share the opinion of his two daughters, for he
knew that Beauty was more fitted to shine in company than her sisters.
He was greatly impressed by the girl's good qualities, and especially by
her patience--for her sisters, not content with leaving her all the work
of the house, never missed an opportunity of insulting her.

They had been living for a year in this seclusion when the merchant
received a letter informing him that a ship on which he had some
merchandise had just come safely home. The news nearly turned the heads
of the two elder girls, for they thought that at last they would be able
to quit their dull life in the country. When they saw their father ready
to set out they begged him to bring them back dresses, furs, caps, and
finery of every kind. Beauty asked for nothing, thinking to herself that
all the money which the merchandise might yield would not be enough to
satisfy her sisters' demands.

'You have not asked me for anything,' said her father.

'As you are so kind as to think of me,' she replied, 'please bring me a
rose, for there are none here.'

Beauty had no real craving for a rose, but she was anxious not to seem
to disparage the conduct of her sisters. The latter would have declared
that she purposely asked for nothing in order to be different from them.

[Illustration: '"_Look at our little sister_"']

The merchant duly set forth; but when he reached his destination
there was a law-suit over his merchandise, and after much trouble he
returned poorer than he had been before. With only thirty miles to go
before reaching home, he was already looking forward to the pleasure of
seeing his children again, when he found he had to pass through a large
wood. Here he lost himself. It was snowing horribly; the wind was so
strong that twice he was thrown from his horse, and when night came on
he made up his mind he must either die of hunger and cold or be eaten by
the wolves that he could hear howling all about him.

[Illustration: '_It was snowing horribly_']

Suddenly he saw, at the end of a long avenue of trees, a strong light.
It seemed to be some distance away, but he walked towards it, and
presently discovered that it came from a large palace, which was all lit
up.

The merchant thanked heaven for sending him this help, and hastened to
the castle. To his surprise, however, he found no one about in the
courtyards. His horse, which had followed him, saw a large stable open
and went in; and on finding hay and oats in readiness the poor animal,
which was dying of hunger, set to with a will. The merchant tied him up
in the stable, and approached the house, where he found not a soul. He
entered a large room; here there was a good fire, and a table laden with
food, but with a place laid for one only. The rain and snow had soaked
him to the skin, so he drew near the fire to dry himself. 'I am sure,'
he remarked to himself, 'that the master of this house or his servants
will forgive the liberty I am taking; doubtless they will be here soon.'

He waited some considerable time; but eleven o'clock struck and still he
had seen nobody. Being no longer able to resist his hunger he took a
chicken and devoured it in two mouthfuls, trembling. Then he drank
several glasses of wine, and becoming bolder ventured out of the room.
He went through several magnificently furnished apartments, and finally
found a room with a very good bed. It was now past midnight, and as he
was very tired he decided to shut the door and go to bed.

It was ten o'clock the next morning when he rose, and he was greatly
astonished to find a new suit in place of his own, which had been
spoilt. 'This palace,' he said to himself, 'must surely belong to some
good fairy, who has taken pity on my plight.'

He looked out of the window. The snow had vanished, and his eyes rested
instead upon arbours of flowers--a charming spectacle. He went back to
the room where he had supped the night before, and found there a little
table with a cup of chocolate on it. 'I thank you, Madam Fairy,' he said
aloud, 'for being so kind as to think of my breakfast.'

Having drunk his chocolate the good man went forth to look for his
horse. As he passed under a bower of roses he remembered that Beauty had
asked for one, and he plucked a spray from a mass of blooms. The very
same moment he heard a terrible noise, and saw a beast coming towards
him which was so hideous that he came near to fainting.

'Ungrateful wretch!' said the Beast, in a dreadful voice; 'I have saved
your life by receiving you into my castle, and in return for my trouble
you steal that which I love better than anything in the world--my roses.
You shall pay for this with your life! I give you fifteen minutes to
make your peace with Heaven.'

The merchant threw himself on his knees and wrung his hands. 'Pardon, my
lord!' he cried; 'one of my daughters had asked for a rose, and I did
not dream I should be giving offence by picking one.'

'I am not called "my lord,"' answered the monster, 'but "The Beast." I
have no liking for compliments, but prefer people to say what they
think. Do not hope therefore to soften me by flattery. You have
daughters, you say; well, I am willing to pardon you if one of your
daughters will come, of her own choice, to die in your place. Do not
argue with me--go! And swear that if your daughters refuse to die in
your place you will come back again in three months.'

[Illustration: _The Beast_]

The good man had no intention of sacrificing one of his daughters to
this hideous monster, but he thought that at least he might have the
pleasure of kissing them once again. He therefore swore to return, and
the Beast told him he could go when he wished. 'I do not wish you to go
empty-handed,' he added; 'return to the room where you slept; you will
find there a large empty box. Fill it with what you will; I will have it
sent home for you.'

With these words the Beast withdrew, leaving the merchant to reflect
that if he must indeed die, at all events he would have the consolation
of providing for his poor children.

He went back to the room where he had slept. He found there a large
number of gold pieces, and with these he filled the box the Beast had
mentioned. Having closed the latter, he took his horse, which was still
in the stable, and set forth from the palace, as melancholy now as he
had been joyous when he entered it.

The horse of its own accord took one of the forest roads, and in a few
hours the good man reached his own little house. His children crowded
round him, but at sight of them, instead of welcoming their caresses, he
burst into tears. In his hand was the bunch of roses which he had
brought for Beauty, and he gave it to her with these words:

'Take these roses, Beauty; it is dearly that your poor father will have
to pay for them.'

Thereupon he told his family of the dire adventure which had befallen
him. On hearing the tale the two elder girls were in a great commotion,
and began to upbraid Beauty for not weeping as they did. 'See to what
her smugness has brought this young chit,' they said; 'surely she might
strive to find some way out of this trouble, as we do! But oh, dear me,
no; her ladyship is so determined to be different that she can speak of
her father's death without a tear!'

'It would be quite useless to weep,' said Beauty. 'Why should I lament
my father's death? He is not going to die. Since the monster agrees to
accept a daughter instead, I intend to offer myself to appease his fury.
It will be a happiness to do so, for in dying I shall have the joy of
saving my father, and of proving to him my devotion.'

'No, sister,' said her three brothers; 'you shall not die; we will go in
quest of this monster, and will perish under his blows if we cannot kill
him.'

'Do not entertain any such hopes, my children,' said the merchant; 'the
power of this Beast is so great that I have not the slightest
expectation of escaping him. I am touched by the goodness of Beauty's
heart, but I will not expose her to death. I am old and have not much
longer to live; and I shall merely lose a few years that will be
regretted only on account of you, my dear children.'

'I can assure you, father,' said Beauty, 'that you will not go to this
palace without me. You cannot prevent me from following you. Although I
am young I am not so very deeply in love with life, and I would rather
be devoured by this monster than die of the grief which your loss would
cause me.' Words were useless. Beauty was quite determined to go to this
wonderful palace, and her sisters were not sorry, for they regarded her
good qualities with deep jealousy.

The merchant was so taken up with the sorrow of losing his daughter that
he forgot all about the box which he had filled with gold. To his
astonishment, when he had shut the door of his room and was about to
retire for the night, there it was at the side of his bed! He decided
not to tell his children that he had become so rich, for his elder
daughters would have wanted to go back to town, and he had resolved to
die in the country. He did confide his secret to Beauty, however, and
the latter told him that during his absence they had entertained some
visitors, amongst whom were two admirers of her sisters. She begged her
father to let them marry; for she was of such a sweet nature that she
loved them, and forgave them with all her heart the evil they had done
her.

When Beauty set off with her father the two heartless girls rubbed their
eyes with an onion, so as to seem tearful; but her brothers wept in
reality, as did also the merchant. Beauty alone did not cry, because she
did not want to add to their sorrow.

The horse took the road to the palace, and by evening they espied it,
all lit up as before. An empty stable awaited the nag, and when the good
merchant and his daughter entered the great hall, they found there a
table magnificently laid for two people. The merchant had not the heart
to eat, but Beauty, forcing herself to appear calm, sat down and served
him. Since the Beast had provided such splendid fare, she thought to
herself, he must presumably be anxious to fatten her up before eating
her.

When they had finished supper they heard a terrible noise. With tears
the merchant bade farewell to his daughter, for he knew it was the
Beast. Beauty herself could not help trembling at the awful apparition,
but she did her best to compose herself. The Beast asked her if she had
come of her own free will, and she timidly answered that such was the
case.

'You are indeed kind,' said the Beast, 'and I am much obliged to you.
You, my good man, will depart to-morrow morning, and you must not think
of coming back again. Good-bye, Beauty!'

'Good-bye, Beast!' she answered.

Thereupon the monster suddenly disappeared.

'Daughter,' said the merchant, embracing Beauty, 'I am nearly dead with
fright. Let me be the one to stay here!'

'No, father,' said Beauty, firmly, 'you must go to-morrow morning, and
leave me to the mercy of Heaven. Perhaps pity will be taken on me.'

They retired to rest, thinking they would not sleep at all during the
night, but they were hardly in bed before their eyes were closed in
sleep. In her dreams there appeared to Beauty a lady, who said to her:

'Your virtuous character pleases me, Beauty. In thus undertaking to give
your life to save your father you have performed an act of goodness
which shall not go unrewarded.'

When she woke up Beauty related this dream to her father. He was
somewhat consoled by it, but could not refrain from loudly giving vent
to his grief when the time came to tear himself away from his beloved
child.

As soon as he had gone Beauty sat down in the great hall and began to
cry. But she had plenty of courage, and after imploring divine
protection she determined to grieve no more during the short time she
had yet to live.

She was convinced that the Beast would devour her that night, but made
up her mind that in the interval she would walk about and have a look at
this beautiful castle, the splendour of which she could not but admire.

Imagine her surprise when she came upon a door on which were the words
'Beauty's Room'! She quickly opened this door, and was dazzled by the
magnificence of the appointments within. 'They are evidently anxious
that I should not be dull,' she murmured, as she caught sight of a
large bookcase, a harpsichord, and several volumes of music. A moment
later another thought crossed her mind. 'If I had only a day to spend
here,' she reflected, 'such provision would surely not have been made
for me.'

This notion gave her fresh courage. She opened the bookcase, and found a
book in which was written, in letters of gold:

'Ask for anything you wish: you are mistress of all here.'

'Alas!' she said with a sigh, 'my only wish is to see my poor father,
and to know what he is doing.'

As she said this to herself she glanced at a large mirror. Imagine her
astonishment when she perceived her home reflected in it, and saw her
father just approaching. Sorrow was written on his face; but when her
sisters came to meet him it was impossible not to detect, despite the
grimaces with which they tried to simulate grief, the satisfaction they
felt at the loss of their sister. In a moment the vision faded away, yet
Beauty could not but think that the Beast was very kind, and that she
had nothing much to fear from him.

At midday she found the table laid, and during her meal she enjoyed an
excellent concert, though the performers were invisible. But in the
evening, as she was about to sit down at the table, she heard the noise
made by the Beast, and quaked in spite of herself.

'Beauty,' said the monster to her, 'may I watch you have your supper?'

'You are master here,' said the trembling Beauty.

'Not so,' replied the Beast; 'it is you who are mistress; you have only
to tell me to go, if my presence annoys you, and I will go immediately.
Tell me, now, do you not consider me very ugly?'

'I do,' said Beauty, 'since I must speak the truth; but I think you are
also very kind.'

'It is as you say,' said the monster; 'and in addition to being ugly, I
lack intelligence. As I am well aware, I am a mere beast.'

'It is not the way with stupid people,' answered Beauty, 'to admit a
lack of intelligence. Fools never realise it.'

'Sup well, Beauty,' said the monster, 'and try to banish dulness from
your home--for all about you is yours, and I should be sorry to think
you were not happy.'

'You are indeed kind,' said Beauty. 'With one thing, I must own, I am
well pleased, and that is your kind heart. When I think of that you no
longer seem to be ugly.'

'Oh yes,' answered the Beast, 'I have a good heart, right enough, but I
am a monster.'

'There are many men,' said Beauty, 'who make worse monsters than you,
and I prefer you, notwithstanding your looks, to those who under the
semblance of men hide false, corrupt, and ungrateful hearts.'

The Beast replied that if only he had a grain of wit he would compliment
her in the grand style by way of thanks; but that being so stupid he
could only say he was much obliged.

Beauty ate with a good appetite, for she now had scarcely any fear of
the Beast. But she nearly died of fright when he put this question to
her:

'Beauty, will you be my wife?'

For some time she did not answer, fearing lest she might anger the
monster by her refusal. She summoned up courage at last to say, rather
fearfully, 'No, Beast!'

The poor monster gave forth so terrible a sigh that the noise of it went
whistling through the whole palace. But to Beauty's speedy relief the
Beast sadly took his leave and left the room, turning several times as
he did so to look once more at her. Left alone, Beauty was moved by
great compassion for this poor Beast. 'What a pity he is so ugly,' she
said, 'for he is so good.'

Beauty passed three months in the palace quietly enough. Every evening
the Beast paid her a visit, and entertained her at supper by a display
of much good sense, if not with what the world calls wit. And every day
Beauty was made aware of fresh kindnesses on the part of the monster.
Through seeing him often she had become accustomed to his ugliness, and
far from dreading the moment of his visit, she frequently looked at her
watch to see if it was nine o'clock, the hour when the Beast always
appeared.

One thing alone troubled Beauty; every evening, before retiring to bed,
the monster asked her if she would be his wife, and seemed overwhelmed
with grief when she refused. One day she said to him:

'You distress me, Beast. I wish I could marry you, but I cannot deceive
you by allowing you to believe that that can ever be. I will always be
your friend--be content with that.'

'Needs must,' said the Beast. 'But let me make the position plain. I
know I am very terrible, but I love you very much, and I shall be very
happy if you will only remain here. Promise that you will never leave
me.'

Beauty blushed at these words. She had seen in her mirror that her
father was stricken down by the sorrow of having lost her, and she
wished very much to see him again. 'I would willingly promise to remain
with you always,' she said to the Beast, 'but I have so great a desire
to see my father again that I shall die of grief if you refuse me this
boon.'

'I would rather die myself than cause you grief,' said the monster. 'I
will send you back to your father. You shall stay with him, and your
Beast shall die of sorrow at your departure.'

'No, no,' said Beauty, crying; 'I like you too much to wish to cause
your death. I promise you I will return in eight days. You have shown me
that my sisters are married, and that my brothers have joined the army.
My father is all alone; let me stay with him one week.'

'You shall be with him to-morrow morning,' said the Beast. 'But remember
your promise. All you have to do when you want to return is to put your
ring on a table when you are going to bed. Good-bye, Beauty!'

As usual, the Beast sighed when he said these last words, and Beauty
went to bed quite down-hearted at having grieved him.

[Illustration: "EVERY EVENING THE BEAST PAID HER A VISIT."]

When she woke the next morning she found she was in her father's house.
She rang a little bell which stood by the side of her bed, and it was
answered by their servant, who gave a great cry at sight of her. The
good man came running at the noise, and was overwhelmed with joy at the
sight of his dear daughter. Their embraces lasted for more than a
quarter of an hour. When their transports had subsided, it occurred to
Beauty that she had no clothes to put on; but the servant told her that
she had just discovered in the next room a chest full of dresses trimmed
with gold and studded with diamonds. Beauty felt grateful to the
Beast for this attention, and having selected the simplest of the gowns
she bade the servant pack up the others, as she wished to send them as
presents to her sisters. The words were hardly out of her mouth when the
chest disappeared. Her father expressed the opinion that the Beast
wished her to keep them all for herself, and in a trice dresses and
chest were back again where they were before.

When Beauty had dressed she learned that her sisters, with their
husbands, had arrived. Both were very unhappy. The eldest had wedded an
exceedingly handsome man, but the latter was so taken up with his own
looks that he studied them from morning to night, and despised his
wife's beauty. The second had married a man with plenty of brains, but
he only used them to pay insults to everybody--his wife first and
foremost.

The sisters were greatly mortified when they saw Beauty dressed like a
princess, and more beautiful than the dawn. Her caresses were ignored,
and the jealousy which they could not stifle only grew worse when she
told them how happy she was. Out into the garden went the envious pair,
there to vent their spleen to the full.

'Why should this chit be happier than we are?' each demanded of the
other; 'are we not much nicer than she is?'

'Sister,' said the elder, 'I have an idea. Let us try to persuade her to
stay here longer than the eight days. Her stupid Beast will fly into a
rage when he finds she has broken her word, and will very likely devour
her.'

'You are right, sister,' said the other; 'but we must make a great fuss
of her if we are to make the plan successful.'

With this plot decided upon they went upstairs again, and paid such
attention to their little sister that Beauty wept for joy. When the
eight days had passed the two sisters tore their hair, and showed such
grief over her departure that she promised to remain another eight days.

Beauty reproached herself, nevertheless, with the grief she was causing
to the poor Beast; moreover, she greatly missed not seeing him. On the
tenth night of her stay in her father's house she dreamed that she was
in the palace garden, where she saw the Beast lying on the grass nearly
dead, and that he upbraided her for her ingratitude. Beauty woke up with
a start, and burst into tears.

'I am indeed very wicked,' she said, 'to cause so much grief to a Beast
who has shown me nothing but kindness. Is it his fault that he is so
ugly, and has so few wits? He is good, and that makes up for all the
rest. Why did I not wish to marry him? I should have been a good deal
happier with him than my sisters are with their husbands. It is neither
good looks nor brains in a husband that make a woman happy; it is beauty
of character, virtue, kindness. All these qualities the Beast has. I
admit I have no love for him, but he has my esteem, friendship, and
gratitude. At all events I must not make him miserable, or I shall
reproach myself all my life.'

With these words Beauty rose and placed her ring on the table.

Hardly had she returned to her bed than she was asleep, and when she
woke the next morning she saw with joy that she was in the Beast's
palace. She dressed in her very best on purpose to please him, and
nearly died of impatience all day, waiting for nine o'clock in the
evening. But the clock struck in vain: no Beast appeared. Beauty now
thought she must have caused his death, and rushed about the palace with
loud despairing cries. She looked everywhere, and at last, recalling her
dream, dashed into the garden by the canal, where she had seen him in
her sleep. There she found the poor Beast lying unconscious, and thought
he must be dead. She threw herself on his body, all her horror of his
looks forgotten, and, feeling his heart still beat, fetched water from
the canal and threw it on his face.

The Beast opened his eyes and said to Beauty:

'You forgot your promise. The grief I felt at having lost you made me
resolve to die of hunger; but I die content since I have the pleasure of
seeing you once more.'

'Dear Beast, you shall not die,' said Beauty; 'you shall live and become
my husband. Here and now I offer you my hand, and swear that I will
marry none but you. Alas, I fancied I felt only friendship for you, but
the sorrow I have experienced clearly proves to me that I cannot live
without you.'

Beauty had scarce uttered these words when the castle became ablaze with
lights before her eyes: fireworks, music--all proclaimed a feast. But
these splendours were lost on her: she turned to her dear Beast, still
trembling for his danger.

Judge of her surprise now! At her feet she saw no longer the Beast, who
had disappeared, but a prince, more beautiful than Love himself, who
thanked her for having put an end to his enchantment. With good reason
were her eyes riveted upon the prince, but she asked him nevertheless
where the Beast had gone.

'You see him at your feet,' answered the prince. 'A wicked fairy
condemned me to retain that form until some beautiful girl should
consent to marry me, and she forbade me to betray any sign of
intelligence. You alone in all the world could show yourself susceptible
to the kindness of my character, and in offering you my crown I do but
discharge the obligation that I owe you.'

In agreeable surprise Beauty offered her hand to the handsome prince,
and assisted him to rise. Together they repaired to the castle, and
Beauty was overcome with joy to find, assembled in the hall, her father
and her entire family. The lady who had appeared to her in her dream had
had them transported to the castle.

[Illustration: '"_Your doom is to become statues_"']

'Beauty,' said this lady (who was a celebrated fairy), 'come and receive
the reward of your noble choice. You preferred merit to either beauty or
wit, and you certainly deserve to find these qualities combined in one
person. It is your destiny to become a great queen, but I hope that the
pomp of royalty will not destroy your virtues. As for you, ladies,' she
continued, turning to Beauty's two sisters, 'I know your hearts and the
malice they harbour. Your doom is to become statues, and under the stone
that wraps you round to retain all your feelings. You will stand at the
door of your sister's palace, and I can visit no greater punishment upon
you than that you shall be witnesses of her happiness. Only when you
recognise your faults can you return to your present shape, and I am
very much afraid that you will be statues for ever. Pride, ill-temper,
greed, and laziness can all be corrected, but nothing short of a
miracle will turn a wicked and envious heart.'

In a trice, with a tap of her hand, the fairy transported them all to
the prince's realm, where his subjects were delighted to see him again.
He married Beauty, and they lived together for a long time in happiness
the more perfect because it was founded on virtue.




THE FRIENDLY FROG


Once upon a time there was a king who had been at war for a long time
with his neighbours. After many battles had been fought his capital was
besieged by the enemy. Fearing for the safety of the queen, the king
implored her to take refuge in a stronghold to which he himself had
never been but once. The queen besought him with tears to let her remain
at his side, and share his fate, and lamented loudly when the king
placed her in the carriage which was to take her away under escort.

The king promised to slip away whenever possible and pay her a visit,
seeking thus to comfort her, although he knew that there was small
chance of the hope being fulfilled. For the castle was a long way off,
in the midst of a dense forest, and only those with a thorough knowledge
of the roads could possibly reach it.

The queen was broken-hearted at having to leave her husband exposed to
the perils of war, and though she made her journey by easy stages, lest
the fatigue of so much travelling should make her ill, she was downcast
and miserable when at length she reached the castle. She made excursions
into the country round about, when sufficiently recovered, but found
nothing to amuse or distract her. On all sides wide barren spaces met
her eye, melancholy rather than pleasant to look upon.

'How different from my old home!' she exclaimed, as she gloomily
surveyed the scene; 'if I stay here long I shall die. To whom can I talk
in this solitude? To whom can I unburden my grief? What have I done that
the king should exile me? He must wish me, I suppose, to feel the
bitterness of separation to the utmost, since he banishes me to this
hateful castle.'

She grieved long and deeply, and though the king wrote every day to her
with good news of the way the siege was going, she became more and more
unhappy. At last she determined that she would go back to him, but
knowing that her attendants had been forbidden to let her return, except
under special orders from the king, she kept her intention to herself.
On the pretext of wishing sometimes to join the hunt, she ordered a
small chariot, capable of accommodating one person only, to be built for
her. This she drove herself, and used to keep up with the hounds so
closely that she would leave the rest of the hunt behind. The chariot
being in her sole control, this gave her the opportunity to escape
whenever she liked, and the only obstacle was her lack of familiarity
with the roads through the forest. She trusted, however, to the favour
of Providence to bring her safely through it.

She now gave orders for a great hunt to be held, and intimated her wish
that every one should attend. She herself was to be present in her
chariot, and she proposed that every follower of the chase should choose
a different line, and so close every avenue of escape to the quarry. The
arrangements were carried out according to the queen's plan. Confident
that she would soon see her husband again, she donned her most becoming
attire. Her hat was trimmed with feathers of different colours, the
front of her dress with a number of precious stones. Thus adorned, she
looked in her beauty (which was of no ordinary stamp) like a second
Diana.

When the excitement of the chase was at its height she gave rein to her
horses, urging them on with voice and whip, until their pace quickened
to a gallop. But then, getting their bits between their teeth, the team
sped onwards so fast that presently the chariot seemed to be borne upon
the wind, and to be travelling faster than the eye could follow. Too
late the poor queen repented of her rashness. 'What possessed me,' she
cried, 'to think that I could manage such wild and fiery steeds? Alack!
What will become of me! What would the king do if he knew of my great
peril? He only sent me away because he loves me dearly, and wished me to
be in greater safety--and this is the way I repay his tender care!'

Her piteous cries rang out upon the air, but though she called on Heaven
and invoked the fairies to her aid, it seemed that all the unseen powers
had forsaken her.

Over went the chariot. She lacked the strength to jump clear quickly
enough, and her foot was caught between the wheel and the axle-tree. It
was only by a miracle that she was not killed, and she lay stretched on
the ground at the foot of a tree, with her heart scarcely beating and
her face covered with blood, unable to speak.

For a long time she lay thus. At last she opened her eyes and saw,
standing beside her, a woman of gigantic stature. The latter wore nought
but a lion's skin; her arms and legs were bare, and her hair was tied up
with a dried snake's skin, the head of which dangled over her shoulder.
In her hand she carried, for walking-stick, a stone club, and a quiver
full of arrows hung at her side.

This extraordinary apparition convinced the queen that she was dead, and
indeed it seemed impossible that she could have survived so terrible a
disaster. 'No wonder death needs resolution,' she murmured, 'since
sights so terrible await one in the other world.'

The giantess overheard these words, and laughed to find the queen
thought herself dead.

'Courage,' she said; 'you are still in the land of the living, though
your lot is not improved. I am the Lion-Witch. My dwelling is near by;
you must come and live with me.'

'If you will have the kindness, good Lion-Witch, to take me back to my
castle, the king, who loves me dearly, will not refuse you any ransom
you demand, though it were the half of his kingdom.'

'I will not do that,' replied the giantess, 'for I have wealth enough
already. Moreover, I am tired of living alone, and as you have your wits
about you it is possible you may be able to amuse me.'

With these words she assumed the shape of a lioness, and taking the
queen on her back, bore her off into the depths of a cavern. There she
anointed the queen's wounds with an essence which quickly healed them.

But imagine the wonder and despair of the queen to find herself in this
dismal lair! The approach to it was by ten thousand steps, which led
downward to the centre of the earth, and the only light was that which
came from a number of lofty lamps, reflected in a lake of quicksilver.
This lake teemed with monsters, each of which was hideous enough to
have terrified one far less timid than the queen. Ravens, screech-owls,
and many another bird of evil omen filled the air with harsh cries. Far
off could be espied a mountain, from the slopes of which there flowed
the tears of all hapless lovers. Its sluggish stream was fed by every
ill-starred love. The trees had neither leaves nor fruit, and the ground
was cumbered with briars, nettles, and rank weeds. The food, too, was
such as might be expected in such a horrid clime. A few dried roots,
horse-chestnuts, and thorn-apples--this was all the fare with which the
Lion-Witch appeased the hunger of those who fell into her clutches.

When the queen was well enough to be set to work, the Witch told her she
might build herself a hut, since she was fated to remain in her company
for the rest of her life. On hearing this the queen burst into tears.
'Alas!' she cried, 'what have I done that you should keep me here? If my
death, which I feel to be nigh, will cause you any pleasure, then I
implore you to kill me: I dare not hope for any other kindness from you.
But do not condemn me to the sadness of a life-long separation from my
husband.'

But the Lion-Witch merely laughed at her, bidding her dry her tears, if
she would be wise, and do her part to please her. Otherwise, she
declared, her lot would be the most miserable in the world.

'And what must I do to soften your heart?' replied the queen.

'I have a liking for fly-pasties,' said the Lion-Witch; 'and you must
contrive to catch flies enough to make me a large and tasty one.'

[Illustration: '_The approach to it was by ten thousand steps_']

'But there are no flies here,' rejoined the queen; 'and even if there
were there is not enough light to catch them by. Moreover, supposing I
caught some, I have never in my life made pastry. You are therefore
giving me orders which I cannot possibly carry out.'

'No matter,' said the pitiless Lion-Witch; 'what I want I will have!'

The queen made no reply, but reflected that, no matter how cruel the
Witch might be, she had only one life to lose, and in her present plight
what terror could death hold for her? She did not attempt to look for
flies, therefore, but sat down beneath a yew tree, and gave way to tears
and lamentations. 'Alas, dear husband,' she cried, 'how grieved you will
be when you go to fetch me from the castle, and find me gone! You will
suppose me to be dead or faithless; how I hope that you will mourn the
loss of my life, not the loss of my love! Perhaps the remains of my
chariot will be found in the wood, with all the ornaments I had put on
to please you: at sight of these you will not doubt any more that I am
dead. But then, how do I know that you will not bestow on some one else
the heartfelt love which once belonged to me? At all events I shall be
spared the sorrow of that knowledge, since I am never to return to the
world.'

These thoughts would have filled her mind for a long time, but she was
interrupted by the dismal croaking of a raven overhead. Lifting her
eyes, she saw in the dim light a large raven on the point of swallowing
a frog which it held in its beak. 'Though I have no hope of help for
myself,' she said, 'I will not let this unfortunate frog die, if I can
save it; though our lots are so different, its sufferings are quite as
great as mine.' She picked up the first stick which came to hand, and
made the raven let go its prey. The frog fell to the ground and lay for
a time half stunned; but as soon as it could think, in its froggish way,
it began to speak. 'Beautiful queen,' it said, 'you are the first
friendly soul that I have seen since my curiosity brought me here.'

[Illustration: _The Friendly Frog_]

'By what magic are you endowed with speech, little Frog?' replied the
queen; 'and what people are they whom you see here? I have seen none at
all as yet.'

'All the monsters with which the lake is teeming,' replied the little
Frog, 'were once upon a time in the world. Some sat on thrones, some
held high positions at Court; there are even some royal ladies here who
were the cause of strife and bloodshed. It is these latter whom you see
in the shape of leeches, and they are condemned to remain here for a
certain time. But of those who come here none ever returns to the world
better or wiser.'

'I can quite understand,' said the queen, 'that wicked people are not
improved by merely being thrown together. But how is it that you are
here, my friendly little Frog?'

'I came here out of curiosity,' she replied. 'I am part fairy, and
though, in certain directions, my powers are limited, in others they are
far-reaching. The Lion-Witch would kill me if she knew that I was in her
domain.'

'Whatever your fairy powers,' said the queen, 'I cannot understand how
you could have fallen into the raven's clutches and come so near to
being devoured.'

'That is easily explained,' said the Frog. 'I have nought to fear when
my little cap of roses is on my head, for that is the source of my
power. Unluckily I had left it in the marsh when that ugly raven pounced
upon me, and but for you, Madam, I should not now be here. Since you
have saved my life, you have only to command me and I will do everything
in my power to lessen the misfortunes of your lot.'

'Alas, dear Frog,' said the queen, 'the wicked fairy who holds me
captive desires that I should make her a fly-pasty. But there are no
flies here, and if there were I could not see to catch them in the dim
light. I am like, therefore, to get a beating which will kill me.'

'Leave that to me,' said the Frog, 'I will quickly get you some.'

Thereupon the Frog smeared sugar all over herself, and the same was done
by more than six thousand of her froggy friends. They then made for a
place where the fairy had a large store of flies, which she used to
torment some of her luckless victims. No sooner did the flies smell the
sugar than they flew to it, and found themselves sticking to the frogs.
Away, then, went the latter at a gallop, to bring their friendly aid to
the queen. Never was there such a catching of flies before, nor a better
pasty than the one the queen made for the fairy. The surprise of the
Witch was great when the queen handed it to her, for she was baffled to
think how the flies could have been so cleverly caught.

The queen suffered so much from want of protection against the poisonous
air that she cut down some cypress branches and began to build herself a
hut. The Frog kindly offered her services. She summoned round her all
those who had helped in the fly hunt, and they assisted the queen to
build as pretty a little place to live in as you could find anywhere in
the world.

But no sooner had she lain down to rest than the monsters of the lake,
envious of her repose, gathered round the hut. They set up the most
hideous noise that had ever been heard, and drove her so nearly mad that
she got up and fled in fear and trembling from the house. This was just
what the monsters were after, and a dragon, who had once upon a time
ruled tyrannously over one of the greatest countries of the world,
immediately took possession of it.

The poor queen tried to protest against this ill-treatment. But no one
would listen to her: the monsters laughed and jeered at her, and the
Lion-Witch said that if she came and dinned lamentations into her ears
again she would give her a sound thrashing.

The queen was therefore obliged to hold her tongue. She sought out the
Frog, who was the most sympathetic creature in the world, and they wept
together; for the moment she put on her cap of roses the Frog became
able to laugh or weep like anybody else.

'I am so fond of you,' said the Frog to the queen, 'that I will build
your house again, though every monster in the lake should be filled with
envy.'

Forthwith she cut some wood, and a little country mansion for the queen
sprang up so quickly that she was able to sleep in it that very night.
Nothing that could make for the queen's comfort was forgotten by the
Frog, and there was even a bed of wild thyme.

When the wicked fairy learnt that the queen was not sleeping on the
ground, she sent for her and asked:

'What power is it, human or divine, that protects you? This land drinks
only a rain of burning sulphur, and has never produced so much as a
sage-leaf: yet they tell me fragrant herbs spring up beneath your feet.'

'I cannot explain it, madam,' said the queen, 'unless it is due to the
child I am expecting. Perhaps for her a less unhappy fate than mine is
in store.'

'I have a craving just now,' said the Witch, 'for a posy of rare
flowers. See if this happiness which you expect will enable you to get
them. If you do not succeed, such a thrashing as I know well how to give
is surely in store for you.'

The queen began to weep, for threats like these distressed her, and she
despaired as she thought of the impossibility of finding flowers. But
when she returned to her little house, the friendly Frog met her.

'How unhappy you look!' she said.

'Alas, dear friend,' said the queen, 'who would not be so? The Witch has
demanded a posy of the most beautiful flowers. Where am I to find them?
You see what sort of flowers grow here! Yet my life is forfeit if I do
not procure them.'

'Dear queen,' said the Frog tenderly, 'we must do our best to extricate
you from this dilemma. Hereabouts there lives a bat of my
acquaintance--a kindly soul. She moves about more quickly than I do, so
I will give her my cap of roses, and with the aid of this she will be
able to find you flowers.'

The queen curtseyed low, it being quite impossible to embrace the Frog,
and the latter went off at once to speak to the bat. In a few hours the
bat came back with some exquisite flowers tucked under her wings. Off
went the queen with them to the Witch, who was more astonished than
ever, being quite unable to understand in what marvellous way the queen
had been assisted.

The queen never ceased to plot some means of escape, and told the Frog
of her longings. 'Madam,' said the latter, 'allow me first to take
counsel with my little cap, and we will make plans according to what it
advises.' Having placed her cap upon some straw, she burnt in front of
it a few juniper twigs, some capers, and a couple of green peas. She
then croaked five times. This completed the rites, and having donned her
cap again, she began to speak like an oracle.

'Fate, the all-powerful, decrees that you must not leave this place.
You will have a little princess more beautiful than Venus herself. Let
nothing fret you; time alone can heal.'

The queen bowed her head and shed tears, but she determined to have
faith in the friend she had found. 'Whatever happens,' she said, 'do not
leave me here alone, and befriend me when my little one is born.' The
Frog promised to remain with her, and did her best to comfort her.

It is now time to return to the king. So long as the enemy kept him
confined within his capital he could not regularly send messengers to
the queen. But at length, after many sorties, he forced the enemy to
raise the siege. This success gave him pleasure not so much on his own
account, as for the sake of the queen, who could now be brought home in
safety. He knew nothing of the disaster which had befallen her, for none
of his retinue had dared to tell him of it. They had found in the forest
the remains of the chariot, the runaway horses, and the apparel in which
she had driven forth to find her husband, and being convinced that she
was killed or devoured by wild beasts, their one idea was to make the
king believe that she had died suddenly.

It seemed as if the king could not survive this mournful news. He tore
his hair, wept bitterly, and lamented his loss with all manner of
sorrowful cries and sobs and sighs. For several days he would see
nobody, and hid himself from view. Later, he returned to his capital and
entered upon a long period of mourning, to the sincerity of which his
heartfelt sorrow bore even plainer testimony than his sombre garb of
woe. His royal neighbours all sent ambassadors with messages of
condolence, and when the ceremonies proper to these occasions were at
length over, he proclaimed a period of peace. He released his subjects
from military service, and devoted himself to giving them every
assistance in the development of commerce.

Of all this the queen knew nothing. A little princess had been born to
her in the meantime, and her beauty did not belie the Frog's prediction.
They gave her the name of Moufette, but the queen had great difficulty
in persuading the Witch to let her bring up the child, for her ferocity
was such that she would have liked to eat it.

At the age of six months Moufette was a marvel of beauty, and often, as
she gazed upon her with mingled tenderness and pity, the queen would
say:

'Could your father but see you, my poor child, how delighted he would
be, and how dear you would be to him! But perhaps even now he has begun
to forget me: doubtless he believes that death has robbed him of us, and
it may be that another now fills the place I had in his affections.'

Many were the tears she shed over these sad thoughts, and the Frog,
whose love for her was sincere, was moved one day by the sight of her
grief to say to her:

'If you like, Madam, I will go and seek your royal husband. It is a long
journey, and I am but a tardy traveller, but sooner or later I have no
doubt I shall get there.'

[Illustration: "COULD YOUR FATHER BUT SEE YOU, MY POOR CHILD."]

No suggestion could have been more warmly approved, the queen clasping
her hands, and bidding little Moufette do the same, in token of the
gratitude she felt towards the good Frog for offering to make the
expedition. Nor would the king, she declared, be less grateful. 'Of what
advantage, however,' she went on, 'will it be to him to learn that I
am in this dire abode, since it will be impossible for him to rescue me
from it?'

'That we must leave to Providence, Madam,' said the Frog; 'we can but
make those efforts of which we are capable.'

They took farewell of each other, and the queen sent a message to the
king. This was written with her blood on a piece of rag, for she had
neither ink nor paper. The good Frog was bringing him news of herself,
she wrote, and she implored him to give heed to all that she might tell
him, and to believe everything she had to say.

It took the Frog a year and four days to climb the ten thousand steps
which led from the gloomy realm in which she had left the queen, up into
the world. Another year was spent in preparing her equipage, for she was
too proud to consent to appear at Court like a poor and humble frog from
the marshes. A little sedan-chair was made for her, large enough to hold
a couple of eggs comfortably, and this was covered outside with
tortoise-shell and lined with lizard-skin. From the little green frogs
that hop about the meadows she selected fifty to act as maids of honour,
and each of these was mounted on a snail. They had dainty saddles, and
rode in dashing style with the leg thrown over the saddle-bow. A
numerous bodyguard of rats, dressed like pages, ran before the
snails--in short, nothing so captivating had ever been seen before. To
crown all, the cap of roses, which never faded but was always in full
bloom, most admirably became her. Being something of a coquette, too,
she could not refrain from a touch of rouge and a patch or two; indeed,
some said she was painted like a great many other ladies of the land,
but it has been proved by inquiry that this report had its origin with
her enemies.

The journey lasted seven years, and during all that time the poor queen
endured unutterable pain and suffering. Had it not been for the solace
of the beautiful Moufette she must have died a hundred times. Every word
that the dear little creature uttered filled her with delight; indeed,
with the exception of the Lion-Witch, there was nobody who was not
charmed by her.

There came at length a day, after the queen had lived for six years in
this dismal region, when the Witch told her that she could go hunting
with her, on condition that she yielded up everything which she killed.
The queen's joy when she once more saw the sun may be imagined; though
at first she thought she would be blinded, so unaccustomed to its light
had she become. So quick and lively was Moufette, even at five or six
years of age, that she never failed in her aim, and mother and daughter
together were thus able to appease somewhat the fierce instincts of the
Witch.

Meanwhile the Frog was travelling over hills and valleys. Day or night,
she never stopped, and at last she came nigh to the capital, where the
king was now in residence. To her astonishment signs of festivity met
her eye at every turn; on all sides there was merriment, song and
dancing, and the nearer she came to the city the more festive seemed the
mood of the people. All flocked with amazement to see her rustic
retinue, and by the time she reached the city the crowd had become so
large that it was with difficulty she made her way to the palace.

[Illustration: '_The journey lasted seven years_']

At the palace all was splendour, for the king, who had been deprived
of his wife's society for nine years, had at last yielded to the
petitions of his subjects, and was about to wed a princess who possessed
many amiable qualities, though she lacked, admittedly, the beauty of his
wife.

The good Frog descended from her sedan-chair, and with her attendants in
her train entered the royal presence. To request an audience was
unnecessary, for the king and his intended bride and all the princes
were much too curious to learn why she had come to think of interrupting
her.

'Sire,' said the Frog, 'I am in doubt whether the news I bring will
cause you joy or sorrow. I can only conclude, from the marriage which
you are proposing to celebrate, that you are no longer faithful to your
queen.'

Tears fell from the king's eyes. 'Her memory is as dear to me as ever,'
he declared; 'but you must know, good Frog, that monarchs cannot always
follow their own wishes. For nine years now my subjects have been urging
me to take a wife, and indeed it is due to them that there should be an
heir to the throne. Hence my choice of this young princess, whose charms
are apparent.'

'I warn you not to marry her,' rejoined the Frog; 'the queen is not
dead, and I am the bearer of a letter from her, writ in her own blood.
There has been born to you a little daughter, Moufette, who is more
beautiful than the very heavens.'

The king took the rag on which the short message from the queen was
written. He kissed it and moistened it with his tears; and declared,
holding it up for all to see, that he recognised the handwriting of his
wife. Then he plied the Frog with endless questions, to all of which she
replied with lively intelligence.

The princess who was to have been queen, and the envoys who were
attending the marriage ceremony, were somewhat out of countenance.
'Sire,' said one of the most distinguished guests, turning to the king,
'can you contemplate the breaking of your solemn pledge upon the word of
a toad like that? This scum of the marshes has the audacity to come and
lie to the entire Court, just for the gratification of being listened
to!'

'I would have you know, your Excellency,' replied the Frog, 'that I am
no scum of the marshes. Since you force me to display my powers--hither,
fairies all!'

At these words the frogs, the rats, the snails, and the lizards all
suddenly ranged themselves behind the Frog. But in place of their
familiar natural forms, they appeared now as tall, majestic figures,
handsome of mien, and with eyes that outshone the stars. Each wore a
crown of jewels on his head, while over his shoulders hung a royal
mantle of velvet, lined with ermine, the train of which was borne by
dwarfs. Simultaneously the sound of trumpets, drums, and hautboys filled
the air with martial melody, and all the fairies began to dance a
ballet, with step so light that the least spring lifted them to the
vaulted ceiling of the chamber.

The astonishment of the king and his future bride was in no way
diminished when the fairy dancers suddenly changed before their eyes
into flowers--jasmine, jonquils, violets, roses, and carnations--which
carried on the dance just as though they were possessed of legs and
feet. It was as though a flower-bed had come to life, every movement of
which gave pleasure alike to eye and nostril. A moment later the flowers
vanished, and in their place were fountains of leaping water that fell
in a cascade and formed a lake beneath the castle walls. On the surface
of the lake were little boats, painted and gilt, so pretty and dainty
that the princess challenged the ambassadors to a voyage. None hesitated
to do so, for they thought it was all a gay pastime, and a merry prelude
to the marriage festivities. But no sooner had they embarked than boats,
fountains, and lake vanished, and the frogs were frogs once more.

'Sire,' said the Frog, when the king asked what had become of the
princess, 'your wife alone is your queen. Were my affection for her less
than it is, I should not interfere; but she deserves so well, and your
daughter Moufette is so charming, that you ought not to lose one moment
in setting out to their rescue.'

'I do assure you, Madam Frog,' replied the king, 'that if I could
believe my wife to be alive, I would shrink from nothing in the world
for sight of her again.'

'Surely,' said the Frog, 'after the marvels I have shown you, there
ought not to be doubt in your mind of the truth of what I say. Leave
your realm in the hands of those whom you can trust, and set forth
without delay. Take this ring--it will provide you with the means of
seeing the queen, and of speaking with the Lion-Witch, notwithstanding
that she is the most formidable creature in the world.'

The king refused to let any one accompany him, and after bestowing
handsome gifts upon the Frog, he set forth. 'Do not lose heart,' she
said to him; 'you will encounter terrible difficulties, but I am
convinced that your desires will meet with success.' He plucked up
courage at these words, and started upon the quest of his dear wife,
though he had only the ring to guide him.

Now Moufette's beauty became more and more perfect as she grew older,
and all the monsters of the lake of quicksilver were enamoured of her.
Hideous and terrifying to behold, they came and lay at her feet.
Although Moufette had seen them ever since she was born, her lovely eyes
could never grow accustomed to them, and she would run away and hide in
her mother's arms. 'Shall we remain here long?' she would ask; 'are we
never to escape from misery?'

The queen would answer hopefully, so as to keep up the spirits of the
child, but in her heart hope had died. The absence of the Frog and the
lack of any news from her, together with the long time that had passed
since she had heard anything of the king, filled her with grief and
despair.

By now it had become a regular thing for them to go hunting with the
Lion-Witch. The latter liked good things, and enjoyed the game which
they killed for her. The head or the feet of the quarry was all the
share they got, but there was compensation in being allowed to look
again upon the daylight. The Witch would take the shape of a lioness,
and the queen and her daughter would seat themselves on her back. In
this fashion they ranged the forests a-hunting.

One day, when the king was resting in a forest to which his ring had
guided him, he saw them shoot by like an arrow from the bow. They did
not perceive him, and when he tried to follow them he lost sight of them
completely. The queen was still as beautiful as of old, despite all that
she had suffered, and she seemed to her husband more attractive than
ever, so that he longed to have her with him again. He felt certain that
the young princess with her was his dear little Moufette, and he
resolved to face death a thousand times rather than abandon his
intention of rescuing her.

With the assistance of his ring he penetrated to the gloomy region in
which the queen had been for so many years. His astonishment was great
to find himself descending to the centre of the earth, but with every
new thing that met his eyes his amazement grew greater.

The Lion-Witch, from whom nothing was hid, knew well the day and hour of
his destined arrival. Much did she wish that the powers in league with
her could have ordered things otherwise, but she resolved to pit her
strength against his to the full.

She built a palace of crystal which floated in the midst of the lake of
quicksilver, rising and falling on its waves. Therein she imprisoned the
queen and her daughter, and assembling the monsters, who were all
admirers of Moufette, she gave them this warning:

'You will lose this beautiful princess if you do not help me to keep her
from a gallant who has come to bear her away.'

The monsters vowed that they would do everything in their power, and
forthwith they surrounded the palace of crystal. The less heavy
stationed themselves upon the roofs and walls, others mounted guard at
the doors, while the remainder filled the lake.

Following the dictates of his faithful ring, the king went first to the
Witch's cavern. She was waiting for him in the form of a lioness, and
the moment he appeared she sprang upon him. But she was not prepared for
his valiant swordsmanship, and as she put forth a paw to fell him to
the ground, he cut it off at the elbow-joint. She yelped loudly and
fell over, whereupon he went up to her and set his foot upon her throat,
swearing that he would kill her. Notwithstanding her uncontrollable
rage, and the fact that she had nothing to fear from wounds, she felt
cowed by him.

'What do you seek to do to me?' she asked; 'what do you want of me?'

'I intend to punish you,' replied the king with dignity, 'for having
carried away my wife. Deliver her up to me, or I will strangle you on
the spot.'

'Turn your eyes to the lake,' she answered, 'and see if it lies in my
power to do so.'

The king followed the direction she indicated, and saw the queen and her
daughter in the palace of crystal, where it floated like a boat without
oars or rudder on the lake of quicksilver. He was like to die of mingled
joy and sorrow. He shouted to them at the top of his voice, and they
heard him. But how was he to reach them?

While he pondered a plan for the accomplishment of this, the Lion-Witch
vanished. He ran round and round the lake, but no sooner did the palace
draw near enough, at one point or another, to let him make a spring for
it, than it suddenly receded with menacing speed. As often as his hopes
were raised they were dashed to the ground.

Fearing that he would presently tire, the queen cried to him that he
must not lose courage, for the Lion-Witch sought to wear him down, but
that true love could brave all obstacles. She stretched out imploring
hands, and so did Moufette. At sight of this the king felt his courage
renewed within him. Lifting his voice, he declared that he would rather
live the rest of his life in this dismal region than go away without
them.

Patience he certainly needed, for no monarch in the world ever spent
such a miserable time. There was only the ground, cumbered with briars
and thorns, for bed, and for food he had only wild fruit more bitter
than gall. In addition, he was under the perpetual necessity of
defending himself from the monsters of the lake.

Three years went by in this fashion, and the king could not pretend that
he had gained the least advantage. He was almost in despair, and many a
time was tempted to cast himself into the lake. He would have done so
without hesitation had there been any hope that thereby the sufferings
of the queen and the princess could be alleviated.

One day as he was running, after his custom, from one side of the lake
to the other, he was hailed by one of the ugliest of the dragons. 'Swear
by your crown and sceptre, by your kingly robe, by your wife and child,'
said the monster, 'to give me a certain tit-bit to eat for which I have
a fancy, whenever I shall ask for it, and I will take you on my back:
none of the monsters in this lake which are guarding the palace will
prevent us from carrying away the queen and Princess Moufette.'

'Best of dragons!' cried the king; 'I swear to you, and to all of dragon
blood, that you shall have your fill of whatsoever you desire, and I
will be for ever your devoted servant.'

'Promise nothing which you do not mean to fulfil,' replied the dragon;
'for otherwise life-long misfortunes may overwhelm you.'

The king repeated his assurances, for he was dying of impatience to
regain his beloved queen, and mounted the dragon just as though he were
the most dashing of steeds. But now the other monsters rushed to bar the
way. The combat was joined, and nought was audible save the hissing of
the serpents, nought visible save the brimstone, fire and sulphur, which
were belched forth in every direction.

The king reached the palace at last, but there fresh efforts were
required of him, for the entrances were defended by bats and owls and
ravens. But even the boldest of these was torn to pieces by the dragon,
who attacked them tooth and nail. The queen, too, who was a spectator of
this savage fight, kicked down chunks of the wall, and armed with these
helped her dear husband in the fray. Victory at length rested with them,
and as they flew to one another's arms, the enchantment was brought to
an end by a thunderbolt which plunged into the lake and dried it up.

The friendly dragon vanished, along with all the other monsters, and the
king found himself (by what means he had not the least idea) home again
in his own city, and seated, with his queen and Moufette beside him, in
a splendid dining-hall before a table laid with the richest fare. Never
before was there such amazement and delight as theirs. The populace came
running for a sight of the queen and princess, and to add to the wonder
of it all, the latter was seen to be attired in apparel of such
magnificence that the gaze was almost dazzled by her jewels.

You can easily imagine what festivities now took place at the palace.
There were masquerades, and tournaments with tilting at the ring which
attracted the highest princes from all over the world; even more were
these drawn by the bright eyes of Moufette.

Amongst the handsomest and most accomplished in skill-at-arms, there was
none anywhere who could outshine Prince Moufy. He won the applause and
admiration of all, and Moufette, who had hitherto known only dragons and
serpents, was not backward in according him her share of praise. Prince
Moufy was deeply in love with her, and not a day passed but he showed
her some fresh attention in the hope of gaining her favour. In due
course he offered himself as a suitor, informing the king and queen that
his realm was of a richness and extent that might well claim their
favourable consideration.

The king replied that Moufette should make her own choice of husband,
for his only wish was to please her and make her happy. With this answer
the prince was well satisfied, for he was already aware that the
princess was not indifferent to him. He offered her his hand, and she
declared that if he were not to be her husband, then no other man should
be. Prince Moufy threw himself in rapture at her feet, and exacted,
lover-like, a promise that she would keep her word with him.

The prince and princess were betrothed, and Prince Moufy then returned
to his own realm, in order to make preparations for the marriage.
Moufette wept much at his going, for she was oppressed by an
inexplicable presentiment of evil. The prince likewise was much
downcast, and the queen, noticing this, gave him a portrait of her
daughter with an injunction to curtail the splendour of his preparations
rather than allow his return to be delayed. The prince was nothing loth
to obey her behest, and promised to adopt a course which so well
consulted his own happiness.

The princess amused herself with music during his absence, for in a few
months she had learned to play exceedingly well.

One day, when she was in the queen's apartment, the king rushed in.
Tears were streaming down his face as he took his daughter in his arms
and cried aloud: 'Alas, my child! O wretched father! O miserable king!'
Sobs choked his utterance, and he could say no more.

Greatly alarmed, the queen and princess asked him what had happened, and
at last he got out that there had just arrived an enormously tall giant,
who professed to be an envoy of the dragon of the lake; and that in
pursuance of the promise which the king had given in exchange for
assistance in fighting the monsters, the dragon demanded that he should
give up the princess, as he desired to make her into a pie for dinner.
The king added that he had bound himself by solemn oaths to give the
dragon what he asked--and in the days of which we are telling no one
ever broke his word.

The queen received this dire news with piercing shrieks, and clasped her
child to her bosom. 'My life shall be forfeit,' she cried, 'ere my
daughter is delivered up to this monster. Let him rather take our
kingdom and all that we have. Unnatural father! Is it possible you can
consent to such cruelty? What! My child to be made into a pie! The bare
notion is intolerable! Send this grim envoy to me; it may be the
spectacle of my anguish will soften his heart.'

The king said nothing, but went in quest of the giant. He brought him to
the queen, who flung herself at his feet with her daughter. She begged
him to have mercy, and to persuade the dragon to take all that they
possessed, but to spare Moufette's life. The giant replied, however,
that the matter did not rest with him. The dragon, he said, was so
obstinate, and so addicted to the pleasures of the table, that no power
on earth would restrain him from eating what he had a mind to make a
meal of. Furthermore, he counselled them, as a friend, to yield with a
good grace lest greater ills should be in store. At these words the
queen fainted, and the princess would have been in similar case, if she
had not been obliged to go to the assistance of her mother.

No sooner was the dreadful news known throughout the palace than it
spread all over the city. On all sides there was weeping and wailing,
for Moufette was greatly beloved.

The king could not bring himself to give her up to the giant, and the
latter, after waiting several days, grew restive and began to utter
terrible threats. But the king and queen, taking counsel together, were
agreed. 'What is there worse that could happen to us?' they said; 'if
the dragon of the lake were to come and eat us all up, we could not
suffer more, for if Moufette is put into a pie that will be the end of
us.'

Presently the giant informed them that he had received a message from
the dragon, to the effect that if the princess would agree to marry one
of his nephews, he would spare her life. This nephew was not only young
and handsome, but a prince to boot; and there was no doubt of her being
able to live very happily with him.

This proposal somewhat assuaged their grief, but when the queen
mentioned it to the princess, she found her more ready to face death
than entertain this marriage. 'I cannot break faith just to save my
life,' said Moufette; 'you promised me to Prince Moufy, and I will marry
none else. Let me perish, for my death will enable you to live in
peace.' The king in his turn tried, with many endearments, to persuade
her, but she could not be moved. Finally, therefore, it was arranged
that she should be conducted to a mountain-top, there to await the
dragon.

Everything was made ready for the great sacrificial rite, and nothing so
mournful had ever been seen before. Black garments and pale, distraught
faces were encountered at every turn. Four hundred maidens of the
noblest birth, clad in long white robes and wearing crowns of cypress,
accompanied the princess. The latter was borne in an open litter of
black velvet, that all men might behold the wondrous miracle of her
beauty. Her tresses, tied with crape, hung over her shoulders, and she
wore a crown of jasmine and marigolds. The only thing that seemed to
affect her was the grief of the king and queen, who walked behind her,
overwhelmed with the burden of their sorrow. Beside the litter strode
the giant, armed from top to toe, and looking hungrily at the princess,
as though already he savoured his share of the dish she was to make. The
air was filled with sighs and sobs, and the tears of the spectators made
rivulets along the road.

'O Frog, dear Frog,' cried the queen; 'you have indeed forsaken me! Why
give me help in that dismal place and refuse it to me here? Had I but
died then, I should not now be mourning the end of all my hopes, and I
should have been spared the agony of waiting to see my darling Moufette
devoured.'

Slowly the procession made its way to the summit of the fatal mountain.
On arrival there the cries and lamentations broke out with renewed
force, and a more pitiful noise was never heard before. The giant then
directed that all farewells must be said, and a general withdrawal made,
and his order was obeyed. Folks in those days were docile and obedient,
and never thought of combating ill-fortune.

The king and queen, with all the Court, now climbed another hill-top,
from which they could obtain a view of all that happened to the
princess. They had not long to wait, for they quickly espied a dragon,
half a league long, sailing through the sky. He flew laboriously, for
his bulk was so great that even six large wings could hardly support it.
His body was covered all over with immense blue scales and tongues of
poison flame, his twisted tail had fifty coils and another half coil
beyond that, while his claws were each as big as a windmill. His jaws
were agape, and inside could be seen three rows of teeth as long as an
elephant's tusks.

Now while the dragon was slowly wending his way to the mountain-top, the
good and faithful Frog, mounted on a hawk's back, was flying at full
speed to Prince Moufy. She was wearing her cap of roses, and though he
was locked in his privy chamber she needed no key to enter.

'Hapless lover!' she cried; 'what are you doing here? This very moment,
while you sit dreaming about her beauty, Moufette is in direst peril!
See, here is a rose-leaf; I have but to blow upon it and it will become
a mettlesome steed.'

As she spoke there suddenly appeared a green horse. It had twelve hoofs
and three heads, and from the latter it could spit forth fire,
bomb-shells, and cannon-balls respectively. The Frog then gave the
prince a sword, eight yards long and no heavier than a feather, and a
garment fashioned out of a single diamond. This he slipped on like a
coat, and though it was hard as rock it was so pliant that his movements
were in no way impeded.

'Now fly to the rescue of your love,' said the Frog; 'the green horse
will carry you to her. Do not omit to let her know, when you have
delivered her, of what my part has been.'

'Great-hearted fairy!' cried the prince, 'this is no moment to return
you thanks, but from henceforth I am your faithful servant.'

Off went the horse with the three heads, galloping on its twelve hoofs
three times as fast, and more, than the best of ordinary steeds; and in
a very short time the prince had reached the mountain, where he found
his dear princess all alone.

As the dragon slowly drew near, the green horse began to throw out fire,
bomb-shells, and cannon-balls, which greatly disconcerted the monster.
Twenty balls lodged in his throat, his scaly armour was dinted, and the
bomb-shells put out one of his eyes. This enraged him, and he tried to
hurl himself upon the prince. But the latter's long sword was so finely
tempered that he could do what he liked with it, and now he plunged it
in up to the hilt, now cut with it as though it had been a whip. The
prince would have suffered, however, from the dragon's claws had it not
been for his diamond coat, which was impenetrable.

Moufette had recognised her lover from afar, for the gleaming diamond
which covered him was transparent; and she was like to die of terror at
the risk he ran. The king and queen, however, felt hope revive within
them. They had little thought to see arriving so opportunely a horse
with three heads and twelve hoofs that breathed forth fire and flame,
nor yet a prince, in diamond mail, and armed with so redoubtable a
sword, who performed such prodigies of valour. The king put his hat on
the end of his stick, the queen tied a handkerchief to hers, and with
all the Court following suit, there was no lack of signals of
encouragement to the prince. Not that such were necessary, for his own
stout heart and the peril in which he saw Moufette were enough to keep
his courage up.

Heavens, how he fought! Barbs, talons, horns, wings, and scales fell
from the dragon till the ground was covered with them, and the soil was
dyed blue and green with the mingled blood of dragon and horse. Five
times the prince was unhorsed, but each time he picked himself up and
composedly mounted his steed again. Then would follow such cannonades,
bombardments, and flame-throwing as had never been seen or heard of
before.

At length, its strength exhausted, the dragon fell, and the prince
delivered a finishing stroke. None could believe their eyes when from
the gaping wound so made there stepped forth a handsome and elegant
prince, clad in a coat of blue and gold velvet, embroidered with pearls,
and wearing on his head a little Grecian helmet with a crest of white
feathers. With outstretched hands this new-comer ran to Prince Moufy and
embraced him.

'How can I ever repay you, my gallant deliverer?' he cried. 'Never was
monarch confined in a more dreadful prison than the one from which you
have freed me. It is sixteen years since the Lion-Witch condemned me to
it, and I have languished there ever since. Moreover, such is her power
that she would have obliged me, against my will, to devour that sweet
princess. I beg you to let me pay my respects to her, and explain my
hapless plight!'

Astonished and delighted by the remarkable way in which his adventure
had ended, Prince Moufy lavished courtesies upon the newly-discovered
prince. Together they went to Moufette, who rendered thanks a thousand
times to Providence for her unexpected happiness. Already the king and
queen and all the Court had joined her, and everybody spoke at once, and
nobody listened to anybody, while nearly as many tears were shed for joy
as a little time ago had been shed for grief. And finally, to set the
crown on their rejoicing, the good Frog was espied flying through the
air on her hawk. The latter had little golden bells upon its feet, and
when the faint tinkling of these caused every one to look up, there was
the Frog, beautiful as the dawn, with her cap of roses shining like the
sun.

The queen ran to her and took her by one of her little paws. At that
instant the wise Frog was transformed into a majestic royal lady of
gracious mien. 'I come,' she cried, 'to crown the faithful Moufette, who
preferred to face death rather than break her word to Prince Moufy.'
With these words she placed two myrtle wreaths upon the lovers' heads;
and at a signal of three taps from her wand the dragon's bones rose up
and formed a triumphal arch to commemorate the auspicious occasion.

Back to the city went all the company, singing wedding songs as gladly
as they had previously with sorrow bewailed the sacrifice of the
princess. On the morrow the marriage took place, and with what
festivities it was solemnised may be left to the imagination.




PRINCESS ROSETTE


Once upon a time there lived a king and queen who had two handsome boys,
and so well looked after were the latter that they grew apace, like the
daylight.

The queen never had a child without summoning the fairies to be present
at the birth, and she always begged them to tell what its future was to
be. When in due course she had a beautiful little daughter--so pretty
that one could not set eyes on her without loving her--all the fairies
came to visit her, and were hospitably entertained. As they were making
ready to go, the queen said to them:

'Do not forget your friendly custom, but tell me what fortune awaits
Rosette.' Such was the name which had been given to the little princess.

The fairies replied that they had left their magic books at home, but
would come and see her some other time.

'Ah,' said the queen, 'that bodes ill. You are anxious not to distress
me by an unhappy prophecy. But tell me all, I implore you, and hide
nothing from me.'

The fairies did their utmost to excuse themselves. But the queen became
more and more eager to learn everything, and at last the chief of them
made a declaration.

'We fear, Madam,' she said, 'that Rosette will bring disaster on her
brothers, and that in some fashion she will be the cause of their death.
This much and no more can we foretell of the pretty child, and we are
grieved that we should have no better news to give you.'

Then the fairies went away, and the queen was left grieving.

So deep was her grief that the king saw it in her face, and asked what
ailed her. She had gone too near the fire, she told him, and had burnt
all the flax that was on her distaff.

'Is that all?' said the king, and going up to his storeroom he brought
her more flax than she could have spun in a hundred years.

But the queen continued sad, and again the king asked what ailed her.
She declared that in walking by the river she had let her green satin
slipper fall into the water.

'Is that all?' said the king, and summoning all the shoemakers in the
kingdom he brought her ten thousand green satin slippers.

Still she grieved, and once more he asked what ailed her. She told him
that in eating with rather too vigorous an appetite she had swallowed
her wedding-ring, which had been on her finger. The king knew at once
that she was not telling the truth, for he had put away this ring
himself.

'My dear wife,' he said, 'you lie; I put away your ring in my
purse--here it is!'

She was not a little confused at being caught telling a lie (for there
is nothing in the world so ugly), and she saw that the king was
displeased. She told him, therefore, what the fairies had prophesied of
little Rosette, and implored him to say if he could think of any good
remedy.

The king was plunged in the deepest melancholy, so much so that he
remarked on one occasion to the queen: 'I see no other means of saving
our two sons but to bring about the death of our little child while she
is still in long clothes.' But the queen exclaimed that she would rather
suffer death herself. She would never consent, she declared, to such a
cruel course, and he must think of something else.

The royal pair were at their wits' end when the queen was told that in a
forest near the city there lived an aged hermit. His habitation was a
hollow tree, and folks were wont to seek his advice upon all manner of
things. 'I too must go there,' said the queen; 'the fairies have warned
me of the evil, but they have forgotten to tell me of the remedy.'

She rose betimes and mounted a dainty little white mule that was shod
with gold, and took with her two of her ladies, each riding a bonny
horse. When they had entered the wood they dismounted, as a sign of
deference, and presented themselves at the tree where the hermit lived.
The latter had an aversion from the sight of women, but on recognising
the queen he addressed her.

'You are welcome,' he said; 'what do you want of me?'

She told him what the fairies had said of Rosette, and begged for
advice. His reply was that the princess must be placed in a tower and
never be allowed to leave it. The queen tendered her thanks, and having
bestowed liberal alms upon him, returned to tell everything to the king.

When the king had heard her news he gave orders at once for a great
tower to be built. In this the princess was shut up, and to keep her
amused the king and queen and her two brothers went every day to see
her. The elder boy was known as the Big Prince, and the younger as the
Little Prince. Both were passionately attached to their sister, for she
had such beauty and charm as had never been seen before. For the
lightest of looks from her many would have paid a hundred gold pieces
and more.

When the princess was fifteen years old the Big Prince spoke of her to
his father. 'My sister is old enough now to marry, Sire,' he said;
'shall we not soon be celebrating her wedding?' The Little Prince said
the same thing to his mother. But their royal parents turned the
conversation and made no answer on the subject of the marriage.

One day the king and queen were stricken by a grievous malady, and died
almost within twenty-four hours. Throughout the realm there was
mourning; every one wore black, and on all sides the tolling of bells
was heard. Rosette was grieved beyond consolation by the death of her
dear mother.

But when the royal dead had been interred, the noblemen of the realm set
the Big Prince upon a throne of gold and diamonds, robed him in purple
velvet embroidered with suns and moons, and placed a splendid crown upon
his head. Then all the Court cried aloud three times: 'Long live the
King!' and there followed universal festivities and rejoicings.

'Now that we are in power,' said the king and his brother as soon as
they could converse in private, 'we must release our sister from the
tower in which she has languished so long.' They had only to cross the
garden to reach the tower, which was built in a corner. It had been
reared as high as possible, for it had been the intention of the late
king and queen that their daughter should remain in it for life.

Rosette was busy with embroidery when her brothers entered, but on
catching sight of them she rose and left the frame at which she was
working. Taking the king's hand, she said: 'Good-morrow, Sire; you are
king to-day, and I am your humble servant. I implore you to release me
from the tower in which I have been languishing so long.' And with these
words she burst into tears.

The king embraced her and told her not to weep, for he had come to take
her from the tower and establish her in a beautiful castle. The prince,
who had brought a pocketful of sweets to give to Rosette, added his
word. 'Come,' he said, 'let us leave this hateful tower, and do not be
unhappy any longer. Very soon the king will find a husband for you.'

When Rosette saw the beautiful garden, with all its flowers and fruit
and its many fountains, she was overcome with amazement and could not
speak a word. She had never before seen anything of the kind. She looked
about her on all sides, and then ran hither and thither, picking the
fruit from the trees and the flowers from the beds, while her little dog
Frillikin (who was as green as a parrot, had only one ear, and could
dance deliciously) capered in front of her, yapping his loudest, and
amusing everybody present by his absurd gambols.

[Illustration: _Princess Rosette_]

Presently Frillikin dashed into a little copse, and the princess
followed. Never was any one so struck with wonder as she, to behold
there a great peacock with tail outspread. So beautiful, so exquisitely
and perfectly beautiful did it seem to her that she could not take away
her eyes. When the king and the prince joined her they asked what it
was that had so taken her fancy. She pointed to the peacock and asked
what it was, to which they replied that it was a bird that was sometimes
served at table.

'What?' she cried; 'a bird so beautiful as that to be killed and eaten?
I tell you, I will marry no one but the King of the Peacocks, and when I
am queen no one shall ever eat such a dish again!'

No words can express the astonishment of the king. 'My dear sister,' he
said, 'where do you suppose that we are to find the King of the
Peacocks?'

'Wherever you please, Sire,' was the answer; 'but I will marry none but
him!'

After having announced this decision she allowed her brothers to escort
her to their castle. But so great was the fancy she had taken to the
peacock that she insisted on its being brought and placed in her
apartment.

All the ladies of the Court, by whom Rosette had never yet been seen,
now hastened to pay their dutiful respects. Gifts of every kind were
proffered to her--sweetmeats and sugar, gay ribbons, and dresses of
cloth-of-gold, dolls, slippers richly embroidered, with many pearls and
diamonds. All did their best to show her attention, and she displayed
such charming manners, kissing hands and curtseying so graciously when
any gift was offered to her, that not a gentleman or lady of the Court
but left her presence loud in her praise.

While the princess was being thus entertained, the king and the prince
were taking counsel as to how they could find the King of the Peacocks,
supposing such a person did really exist. In pursuit of the plan which
they formed a portrait was painted of the Princess Rosette, and so
cunningly wrought was this picture that only speech seemed wanting to
make it live. Then they said to their sister:

'Since you will marry none but the King of the Peacocks, we are setting
forth together in quest of him through the wide world. If we find him we
shall be well rewarded. Wait for our return, and take care of our
kingdom while we are away.'

Rosette thanked them for the trouble they were taking, and promised to
govern the kingdom well. She declared that while they were away her only
pleasures would be to admire the beautiful peacock and make Frillikin
dance. Their adieux were said with many tears.

Behold, then, the royal pair upon their travels, asking of all whom they
met: 'Do you know the King of the Peacocks?' The reply from all was 'No,
we do not.' Then the travellers would pass on and go further, journeying
in this way so far, far away that no one had ever been so far before.

At last they reached the kingdom of the Cockchafers, and the latter in
their myriads made so loud a buzzing that the king thought he would go
deaf. He asked one who seemed more intelligent than the rest if he knew
whereabouts the King of the Peacocks was to be found.

'Sire,' said the cockchafer, 'his kingdom is thirty thousand leagues
away; you have taken the longest road to get there.'

'How do you know that?' asked the king.

'Because we know you well,' replied the cockchafer; 'every year we spend
two or three months in your garden!'

The king and his brother embraced the cockchafer warmly, and struck up
a great friendship. Arm in arm they all went off to dinner, over which
the visitors expressed their astonishment at the remarkable features of
this country, where the smallest leaf from a tree was worth a gold
piece. Presently they set off for their destination, and as they now
knew the road they were not long in reaching it. They observed that all
the trees were full of peacocks; indeed the place held so many of them
that their screaming as they talked could be heard two leagues away.

'If the King of the Peacocks is himself a peacock,' said the king to his
brother, 'how can our sister dream of marrying him? It would be folly to
sanction it. A nice set of relatives she would present to us--a lot of
little peacocks for nephews!' The prince was equally uneasy in his mind.
'It was an unfortunate notion to come into her head,' he declared; 'I
cannot imagine how she ever came to think that such a person as the King
of the Peacocks existed.'

When they reached the city they found it peopled with men and women, but
the latter all wore garments fashioned out of peacocks' feathers; and
from the profusion in which these objects were everywhere to be seen it
was plain that they were regarded with an intense admiration. They
encountered the King of the Peacocks, who was out for a drive in a
splendid little chariot of gold, studded with diamonds, drawn by a dozen
galloping peacocks.

The King of the Peacocks, fair of complexion, with a crown of peacocks'
feathers surmounting his long and curly yellow locks, was so extremely
handsome that the king and prince were delighted with his appearance. He
guessed from their clothes, so different from those of the natives,
that they were strangers; but to make sure he caused his carriage to
stop and summoned them to him.

The king and the prince advanced to meet him, and bowed low. 'We have
come from far away, Sire,' they said, 'in order to show you a portrait.'
With these words they drew from the pack which they carried the
magnificent portrait of Rosette.

'I do not believe,' said the King of the Peacocks, when he had looked
long and well at it, 'that the world holds so beautiful a maiden.'

'She is a hundred times more beautiful than that,' said the king.

'You are joking,' said the King of the Peacocks.

'Sire,' said the prince, 'this is my brother, who is a monarch like
yourself: men call him King. For myself, I am known as Prince. This
portrait shows our sister, the Princess Rosette. We are here to ask if
you are willing to marry her. She has good sense as well as good looks,
and we will give her for dowry a bushel of golden crowns.'

'Why, certainly,' said the King of the Peacocks, 'I will marry her with
all my heart. I promise she shall want for nothing, and I will love her
truly. But I would have you know that she must be as beautiful as her
picture, and that if she falls short of it by the least little bit, I
will put you to death.'

'We accept the conditions,' said Rosette's two brothers.

'You accept?' said the King of the Peacocks. 'Then you must bide in
prison until the princess has arrived.'

The royal brothers raised no objection to this, for they knew well that
Rosette was more beautiful than her portrait. The King of the Peacocks
saw to it that his captives were well looked after, and went often to
visit them. The portrait of Rosette was placed in his palace, and he was
so taken up with it that, night or day, he could scarcely sleep.

From prison the king and the prince sent a letter to the princess
telling her to pack at once all she might require and come as quickly as
possible, for the King of the Peacocks awaited her. They did not dare to
mention that they were in prison, lest she should be too uneasy.

When the princess received this letter her transports of delight were
enough to kill her. She announced to every one that the King of the
Peacocks had been found, and desired to wed her. Bonfires were lit, guns
fired, and sugar and sweetmeats eaten in abundance; while for three days
every one who came to see the princess was treated to bread and butter
with jam, and cakes and ale.

Having dispensed hospitality in this liberal fashion, the princess gave
all her beautiful dolls to her dearest friends, and entrusted her
brother's realm to the wisest elders of the city. She bade them take
care of everything, spend as little as possible, and save money until
the king should return. At the same time she begged them to look after
her peacock.

Taking with her only her nurse and foster-sister, and her little green
dog Frillikin, she embarked on a vessel and put out to sea. They had
with them the bushel of golden crowns, and clothes enough to last for
ten years, with a change of dress twice a day; and they did nothing but
laugh and sing on the voyage.

Presently the nurse said to the boatman:

'Tell me, tell me, are we near the Land of Peacocks?'

'Not yet, not yet,' replied the boatman.

A little later she asked again:

'Tell me, tell me, are we near it now?'

'Presently, presently,' replied the boatman.

Once more she asked:

'Tell me, tell me, are we near it now?'

[Illustration: _The wicked nurse_]

'Very near, very near,' said the boatman.

When he answered thus the nurse sat down beside him in the stern of the
boat. 'If you like, you can be rich for ever,' she said to him.

'I should like that well,' replied the boatman.

'If you like,' she went on, 'you can gain good money.'

'I ask nothing better,' said he.

'Very well, then,' said the nurse; 'to-night, when the princess is
asleep, you must help me to throw her into the sea. When she is drowned
I will dress up my daughter in her fine clothes, and we will take her to
the King of the Peacocks, who will be delighted to marry her. You shall
have your fill of diamonds as reward.'

The boatman was taken aback by this suggestion from the nurse. He
declared it was a pity to drown so beautiful a princess, and that he had
compassion for her. But the nurse fetched a bottle of wine, and plied
him with drink until he no longer had wits enough left to refuse.

When night fell the princess went to sleep, according to her usual
practice, with little Frillikin comfortably curled up at the foot of the
bed, stirring not a paw. When Rosette was fast asleep the wicked nurse,
who had remained awake, went to find the boatman. She took him to the
cabin where the princess lay, and with the help of the foster-sister
they lifted her up--feather-bed, mattress, sheets, blankets, and
all--without disturbing her, and threw her into the sea just as she was.
So soundly did the princess slumber that she never woke up.

Now luckily her bed was made of feathers from the phoenix, which are
very rare and have this peculiar virtue that they never sink in water.
Consequently the princess went floating along in her bed, just as though
she were in a boat.

Presently, however, the water began little by little to lap first
against the sides of the feather-bed, then against the mattress, until
Rosette began to feel uncomfortable. She turned over restlessly, and
Frillikin woke up. He had a very keen nose, and when he scented the
soles and the cod-fish so near at hand he began yapping. He barked so
loudly that he woke up all the other fish, and they began to swim round
and about. Some of the big fish bumped their heads against the bed, and
there being nothing to steady the latter it spun round and round like a
top.

You may imagine how astonished the princess was! 'Is our vessel doing a
dance upon the water?' she exclaimed; 'I do not remember ever to have
been so uncomfortable as I am to-night.' And all the time Frillikin was
barking as though he had taken leave of his senses.

The wicked nurse and the boatman heard him from afar. 'Do you hear
that?' they exclaimed; 'it is that funny little dog drinking our very
good health with his mistress! Let us make haste and get ashore.' By
this time, you must understand, they were lying off the capital of the
King of the Peacocks.

A hundred carriages had been sent to the water's edge by the king. These
were drawn by animals of every kind--lions, bears, stags, wolves,
horses, oxen, asses, eagles, and peacocks. The carriage in which
Princess Rosette was to be borne was drawn by six blue monkeys which
could leap and dance upon the tight-rope and perform endless amusing
antics; these had trappings of crimson velvet, studded with gold plates.

Sixty young girls awaited the coming of the princess. They had been
selected by the king to be her maids of honour, and their attire, of
every colour of the rainbow, shone with ornaments of which gold and
silver were the least precious.

The nurse had taken great pains over the toilette of her daughter. She
had decked her out in Rosette's most beautiful gown, and placed her
diamonds on her head. But nothing could disguise the fact that she was
an ugly little fright. Her hair was black and greasy, she was cross-eyed
and bow-legged, and in the middle of her back she had a big hump.
Moreover she was ill-tempered and sulky, and was for ever grumbling.

[Illustration: '_She was an ugly little fright_']

When the people of Peacock Land saw her disembark they were so
completely taken aback that none could say a word.

'What's the matter with you all?' she demanded; 'have you all gone to
sleep? Bring me something to eat at once, do you hear? I'll have the
lot of you hanged, precious riff-raff that you are!'

'What a horrible creature!' murmured the citizens amongst themselves,
when they heard these threats; 'as ill-tempered as she is ugly! A nice
bride for our king, or I am much mistaken! It was hardly worth the
trouble to bring her all the way across the world.' The girl meantime
continued to behave in most domineering fashion, giving slaps and blows
to every one without the slightest provocation.

The procession, being very large, was obliged to move slowly, and as the
carriage bore her along she comported herself as though she were a
queen. But all the peacocks, who had perched upon the trees to greet her
as she passed, and had arranged to call out 'Long live the beautiful
Queen Rosette!' cried out when they saw how horrible she was: 'Fie! fie!
how ugly she is!' This enraged her, and she called out to her escort:
'Kill those impudent peacocks: they are insulting me!' But the peacocks
flew nimbly away, and laughed at her.

The rascally boatman was witness of all that occurred, and whispered to
the nurse: 'Things are not going well for us, my good woman: your
daughter should have been prettier.'

'Hold your tongue, stupid!' she replied; 'or you will get us into
trouble.'

Word was brought to the king that the princess was approaching. 'Well,'
said he; 'did her brothers speak the truth? Is she more beautiful than
her portrait?'

'Sire,' said the courtiers, 'if she is only as beautiful, that should be
enough.'

'Very true!' exclaimed the king. 'I shall be content with that. Let us
go and see her.'

He could tell from the din which arose from the courtyard that the
princess had arrived, but the only words he could hear plainly amidst
the hubbub were cries of 'Fie! fie! how ugly she is!' He supposed people
must be referring to some dwarf or pet creature which she had perhaps
brought with her, for it never entered his head that it could be the
princess herself who was meant.

The portrait of Rosette, uncovered, was hoisted on the end of a long
pole, and carried in front of the king, who walked in state with his
barons and peacocks, and the ambassadors from neighbouring kingdoms in
his train. Great was the impatience of the King of the Peacocks to
behold his dear Rosette; but when at length he did set eyes on
her--gracious heavens, it was a wonder the shock did not kill him on the
spot! He flew into a most terrible rage, rending his clothes, and
refusing to go near her. Indeed, she frightened him.

'What!' he cried; 'have those two dastardly prisoners the impudence to
mock me thus, and propose that I should wed such a loathsome creature as
that? They shall die for it! Away with that hussy and her nurse, and the
fellow who brought them here; cast them into the dungeon of my keep!'

Now the king and his brother, who had heard in prison that their sister
was expected, had attired themselves handsomely to receive her. But
instead of the prison being opened and their liberty restored, as they
had anticipated, there came the gaoler with a squad of soldiers, and
made them descend into a black dungeon, swarming with vile creatures,
where the water was up to their necks. Never were two people more
astounded or more distressed. 'Alas!' they cried to each other; 'this is
a doleful wedding feast for us! What has brought this unhappy fate upon
us?' They did not know what in the world to think, except that it was
desired to compass their death, and this reflection filled them with
melancholy.

Three days passed and they heard not a word of anything. At the end of
the third day the King of the Peacocks came and hurled insults at them
through a hole in the wall.

'You called yourselves King and Prince to trap me,' he shouted to them,
'and sought thus to make me promise to wed your sister. But you are
nought but a couple of beggars, not worth the water you drink. You shall
be sent for trial, and the judges will make short work of your case--the
rope to hang you with is being plaited already!'

'Not so fast, King of the Peacocks,' replied the captive monarch,
angrily, 'or you will have cause to repent it! I am a king like
yourself: I rule over a fair land, I have robes and crowns and treasure
in plenty. I pledge my all to the truth of what I say. You must be
joking to talk of hanging us--of what have we robbed you?'

The King of the Peacocks hardly knew what to make of this bold and
confident challenge. He was almost of a mind to spare their lives and
let them take their sister away. But his Chancellor, an arrant
flatterer, egged him on, whispering that if he did not avenge himself,
he would be the laughing-stock of the whole world, and would be looked
upon as a mere twopenny-halfpenny monarch. Thus influenced, he vowed he
would not pardon them, and ordered their trial to take place.

This did not take long, for it was only necessary to compare side by
side the portrait of the true Princess Rosette with the actual person
who had come in her place and claimed identity with her. The prisoners
were forthwith condemned to have their heads cut off as a penalty for
lying, in that they brought the king an ugly little peasant girl after
promising a beautiful princess.

The sentence was read with great ceremony at the prison, but the victims
protested that they had spoken the truth, that their sister was indeed a
princess, and that there was something at the back of all this which
they did not understand. They asked for a respite of seven days, that
they might have an opportunity of establishing their innocence; and
though the King of the Peacock's wrath was such that he had great
difficulty in granting this concession, he agreed to it at length.

Something must now be told of what was happening to poor Princess
Rosette while all these events were taking place at the Court.

Great was her astonishment, and Frillikin's also, to find herself, when
day came, in mid-ocean without boat or any means of assistance. She fell
to weeping, and cried so long and bitterly that all the fishes were
moved to compassion. She knew not what to do, nor what would become of
her.

'There is no doubt,' she said, 'that I have been thrown into the sea by
order of the King of the Peacocks. He has regretted his promise to marry
me, and to be rid of me without fuss he has had me drowned. A strange
way for a man to behave! And I should have loved him so much, and we
should have been so happy together!'

These thoughts made her weep the more, for she could not dispel her
fancy for him.

[Illustration: '_She floated hither and thither_']

For two days she floated hither and thither over the sea, soaked to the
skin, nigh dead with cold, and so nearly benumbed that but for little
Frillikin, who snuggled to her bosom, and kept a little warmth in her,
she must have perished a hundred times. She was famished with hunger,
but on seeing some oysters in their shells she took and ate as many as
would appease her. Frillikin did the same, but only to keep himself
alive, for he did not like them.

When night fell Rosette was filled with terror. 'Bark, Frillikin,' she
said to her dog; 'keep on barking, or the soles will come and eat us!'
So Frillikin barked all night.

[Illustration: '_A kindly old man_']

When morning came the bed was not far off the shore. Hereabouts there
lived, all alone, a kindly old man. His home was a little hut where no
one ever came, and as he had no desire for worldly goods he was very
poor. He was astonished when he heard the barking of Frillikin, for no
dogs ever came that way; and supposing that some travellers must have
missed their road, he went out with the good-natured intention of
putting them right. Suddenly he saw the princess and Frillikin floating
out at sea. The princess caught sight of him, and stretching out her
arms to him, cried:

'Save me, kind old man, or I shall perish; two whole days have I been
floating thus.'

He was filled with pity when he heard her speak thus dolefully, and went
to his house to fetch a big crook. He waded out till the water was up to
his neck, and after being nearly drowned two or three times he
succeeded in grappling the bed and drawing it to the shore.

Rosette and Frillikin were delighted to find themselves once more on
land. Rosette thanked the good man warmly. She accepted the offer of his
cloak, and having wrapped herself in it walked barefoot to his hut.
There he lit a little fire of dry straw, and took from a chest his dead
wife's best dress, with a pair of stockings and shoes, which the
princess put on. Clad thus in peasant's attire, with Frillikin
gambolling round her to amuse her, she looked as beautiful as ever.

The old man saw plainly that Rosette was a great lady, for the coverlets
of her bed were of gold and silver, and her mattress of satin. He begged
her to tell him her story, promising not to repeat a word if she so
desired. She related everything from beginning to end--not without
tears, for she still believed that the King of the Peacocks had meant
her to be drowned.

'What are we to do, my child?' said the old man. 'A great lady like you
is accustomed to live on dainties, and I have only black bread and
radishes--very poor fare for you. But I will go, if you will let me, and
tell the King of the Peacocks that you are here. There is not the least
doubt he will marry you, once he has seen you.'

'He is a bad man,' said Rosette; 'he wanted me to die. If only you can
supply me with a small basket to fasten on my dog's neck, it will be
exceedingly bad luck if he does not bring us back something to eat.'

The old man handed a basket to the princess, and she hung it round
Frillikin's neck with these words: 'Find the best stew-pot in the town,
and bring me back whatever is inside it.' Off went Frillikin to the
town, and as he could think of no better stew-pot than the king's, he
made his way into the royal kitchen. Having found the stew-pot, he
cleverly extricated its contents and returned to the house.

'Now go back to the larder,' said Rosette, 'and bring the best that you
can find there.'

Away went Frillikin to the larder and took some white bread, some choice
wine, and an assortment of fruit and sweets. In fact, he took as much as
he could carry.

When the King of the Peacocks should have dined there was nothing in the
stew-pot and nothing in the larder. Everybody gazed blankly at everybody
else, and the king flew into a terrible rage. 'Oh, very good,' said he;
'it seems I am to have no dinner! Well, put the spits to the fire, and
see to it that some good roast joints are ready for me this evening!'

When evening came the princess said to Frillikin: 'Find the best kitchen
in the town and bring me a nice roast joint.' Off went Frillikin to
carry out this order from his mistress. Thinking there could be no
better kitchen than the king's, he slipped in quietly when the cooks'
backs were turned, and took off the spit a roast joint, which looked so
good that the mere sight of it gave one an appetite. His basket was full
when he brought it back to the princess, but she sent him off again to
the larder, and from there he carried away all the king's sweetmeats and
dessert.

The king was exceedingly hungry, having had no dinner, and ordered
supper betimes. But there was nothing to eat, and he went to bed in a
frightful temper. Next day at dinner and supper it was just the same.
For three days the king had nothing to eat or drink, for every time he
sat down at table it was found that everything had been stolen.

The Chancellor, being very much afraid that the king would die, went and
hid in a corner of the kitchen, whence he could keep the stew-pot on the
fire constantly in view. To his astonishment he saw a little green dog,
with only one ear, creep in stealthily, take the lid off the pot, and
transfer the meat to his basket. He followed it in order to find out
where it went, and saw it leave the town. Still pursuing, he came to the
house of the good old man. He went immediately to the king and told him
that it was to a poor peasant's house that every morning and evening his
dinner and supper vanished.

The king was mightily astonished, and ordered investigations to be made.
The Chancellor, to curry favour, volunteered to go himself, and took
with him a posse of archers. They found the old man at dinner with the
princess, and the pair of them eating the king's provisions. They seized
and bound them with strong ropes, not forgetting to deal in like manner
with Frillikin.

'To-morrow,' said the king, when he was told that the prisoners had
arrived, 'the seven days' grace expires which I granted to those
miscreants who insulted me. They shall go to execution with the stealers
of my dinner.'

When the King of the Peacocks entered the court of justice the old man
flung himself on his knees, and declared that he would narrate all that
had happened. As he told his story the king eyed the beautiful princess,
and was touched by her weeping. When presently the good man declared
that her name was the Princess Rosette, and that she had been thrown
into the sea, he bounded three times into the air, despite the weak
state in which he was after going so long without food, and ran to
embrace her. As he undid the cords which bound her he cried out that he
loved her with all his heart.

[Illustration: Decoration]

A guard had been sent for the princes, who approached just then. They
came sadly with bowed heads, for they believed the hour of their
execution had come. The nurse and her daughter were brought in at the
same moment. Recognition was instant on all sides. Rosette flung herself
into her brothers' arms, while the nurse and her daughter, with the
boatman, fell on their knees and prayed for clemency. So joyous was the
occasion that the king and the princess pardoned them. The good old man
was handsomely rewarded, and given quarters at the palace for the rest
of his life.

Finally, the King of the Peacocks made all amends in his power to the
royal brothers, expressing his deep regret at having ill-treated them.
The nurse delivered up to Rosette her beautiful dresses and the bushel
of golden crowns, and the wedding festivities lasted for fifteen days.
Every one was happy, not excepting Frillikin, who ate nothing but
partridge wings for the rest of his life.

[Illustration: Decoration]


                        THE END


     Edinburgh: Printed by T. and A. CONSTABLE LTD.



Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _underscore_.

Other than the corrections listed below, printer's inconsistencies in
spelling, punctuation, hyphenation, and ligature usage have been
retained.

The following misprints have been corrected:

  changed "book-case" into bookcase page 127
  added ' before I am sure,' page 120
  added ' after there are no flies here, page 145
  added ' after possibly carry out. page 145

Illustrations have been moved from the middle of a paragraph to the
closest paragraph break.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLD-TIME STORIES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The National Nursery Book
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The National Nursery Book

Author: Unknown

Release date: March 8, 2008 [eBook #24778]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Jacqueline Jeremy, Janet Blenkinship and the
        Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
        (This file was produced from images generously made
        available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NATIONAL NURSERY BOOK ***




Produced by Jacqueline Jeremy, Janet Blenkinship and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









THE

NATIONAL NURSERY BOOK.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

   THE NATIONAL

   NURSERY BOOK.

   COMPRISING

   RED RIDING-HOOD.
   PUSS-IN-BOOTS.
   MOTHER HUBBARD.
   COCK ROBIN'S DEATH.
   JACK AND BEAN-STALK.
   TOM THUMB.
   CINDERELLA.
   THE THREE BEARS.
   PUNCH AND JUDY.
   THE PETS.
   NURSERY SONGS.
   NURSERY RHYMES.
   NURSERY DITTIES.
   NURSERY TALES.
   NURSERY JINGLES.

   WITH

   _ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY ILLUSTRATIONS_.

   London:
   FREDERICK WARNE AND CO.,

   BEDFORD STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
   NEW YORK: SCRIBNER, WELFORD, AND ARMSTRONG.




[Illustration]

CONTENTS.


   RED RIDING-HOOD.
   PUSS-IN-BOOTS.
   MOTHER HUBBARD.
   COCK ROBIN'S DEATH.
   JACK AND THE BEAN-STALK.
   TOM THUMB.
   CINDERELLA.
   THE THREE BEARS.
   PUNCH AND JUDY.
   THE PETS.
   NURSERY SONGS.
   NURSERY RHYMES.
   NURSERY DITTIES.
   NURSERY TALES.
   NURSERY JINGLES.

[Illustration]




PREFACE.


The Publishers offer in this little volume well known and long loved
stories to their young readers. The tales which have delighted the
children of many generations will, they feel assured, be equally welcome
in the nurseries of the present day, which, with the popularity and
antiquity of the contents of the volume, justify them in styling it THE
NATIONAL NURSERY BOOK.




[Illustration]

RED RIDING-HOOD.


Once upon a time there lived on the borders of a great forest a woodman
and his wife who had one little daughter, a sweet, kind child, whom
every one loved. She was the joy of her mother's heart, and to please
her, the good woman made her a little scarlet cloak and hood, and the
child looked so pretty in it that everybody called her Little Red
Riding-Hood.


[Illustration: RED RIDING HOOD PREPARING FOR HER JOURNEY.]

One day her mother told her she meant to send her to her grandmother--a
very old woman who lived in the heart of the wood--to take her some
fresh butter and new-laid eggs and a nice cake. Little Red Riding-Hood
was very pleased to be sent on this errand, for she liked to do kind
things, and it was so very long since she had seen her grandmother
that she had almost forgotten what the dame looked like.

[Illustration: LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD GATHERING FLOWERS.]


_THE WOLF._

The sun was shining brightly, but it was not too warm under the shade of
the old trees, and Red Riding-Hood sang with glee as she gathered a
great bunch of wild flowers to give to her grandmother. She sang so
sweetly that a cushat dove flew down from a tree and followed her. Now,
it happened that a wolf, a very cruel, greedy creature, heard her song
also, and longed to eat her for his breakfast, but he knew Hugh, the
woodman, was at work very near, with his great dog, and he feared they
might hear Red Riding-Hood cry out, if he frightened her, and then they
would kill him. So he came up to her very gently and said, "Good day,
Little Red Riding-Hood; where are you going?"

"To see my grandmother," said the child, "and take her a present from
mother of eggs and butter and cake."

"Where does your grandmamma live?" asked the wolf.

"Quite in the middle of the wood," she replied.

"Oh! I think I know the house. Good day, Red Riding-Hood." And the wolf
ran off as fast as he could


_AT PLAY IN THE WOOD._

Little Red Riding-Hood was not in a hurry, and there were many things to
amuse her in the wood. She ran after the white and yellow butterflies
that danced before her, and sometimes she caught one, but she always let
it go again, for she never liked to hurt any creature.

[Illustration: THE WOLF FOLLOWS LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD.]

And then there were the merry, cunning little squirrels to watch,
cracking nuts on the branches of the old trees, and every now and then a
rabbit would hurry away through the tall ferns, or a great bee come
buzzing near her, and she would stop to watch it gathering honey from
the flowers, and wild thyme. So she went on very slowly. By-and-by she
saw Hugh, the woodman. "Where are you going, Little Red Riding-Hood,"
said he, "all alone?"

[Illustration: LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD CATCHING BUTTERFLIES.]

"I am going to my grandmamma's," said the child. "Good day; I must make
haste now, for it grows late."


_GRANDMOTHER AND THE WOLF._

While Little Red Riding-Hood was at play in the wood, the great wolf
galloped on as fast as he could to the old woman's house. Grandmother
lived all by herself, but once or twice a-day a neighbour's child came
to tidy her house and get her food. Now, grandmother was very feeble,
and often kept her bed; and it happened that she was in bed the day
Little Red Riding-Hood went to see her. When the wolf reached the
cottage door he tapped.

"Who is there?" asked the old dame.

"Little Red Riding-Hood, granny," said the wolf, trying to speak like
the child.

"Come in, my dear," said the old lady, who was a little deaf. "Pull the
string and the latch will come up."

The wolf did as she told him, went in, and you may think how frightened
poor grandmother was when she saw him standing by her bed instead of
Little Red Riding-Hood.


_RED RIDING-HOOD AT THE DOOR._

Very soon the wolf, who was quite hungry after his run, eat up poor
grandmother. Indeed, she was not enough for his breakfast, and so he
thought he would like to eat sweet Red Riding-Hood also. Therefore he
dressed himself in granny's nightcap and got into bed, and waited for
the child to knock at the door. But he waited a long time.

[Illustration: THE WOLF AT THE GRANDMOTHER'S COTTAGE.]

By and by Little Red Riding-Hood reached her grandmother's house, and
tapped at the door.

[Illustration: RED RIDING HOOD AT HER GRANDMOTHER'S DOOR.]

"Come in," said the wolf, in a squeaking voice. "Pull the string, and
the latch will come up."

Red Riding-Hood thought grandmother must have a cold, she spoke so
hoarsely; but she went in at once, and there lay her granny, as she
thought, in bed.

"If you please, grandmamma, mother sends you some butter and eggs," she
said.

"Come here, dear," said the wicked wolf, "and let me kiss you," and Red
Riding-Hood obeyed.


_THE WOLF AND THE CHILD._

But when Red Riding-Hood saw the wolf she felt frightened. She had
nearly forgotten grandmother, but she did not think she had been so
ugly.

"Grandmamma," she said, "what a great nose you have."

"All the better to smell with, my dear," said the wolf.

"And, grandmamma, what large ears you have."

"All the better to hear with, my dear."

"Ah! grandmamma, and what large eyes you have."

"All the better to see with, my dear," said the wolf, showing his teeth,
for he longed to eat the child up.

"Oh, grandmamma, and what great teeth you have!" said Red Riding-Hood.

[Illustration: LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD DISCOVERS THE WOLF.]

"All the better to eat you up with," growled the wolf, and, jumping out
of bed, he rushed at Red Riding-Hood and would have eaten her up, but
just at that minute the door flew open and a great dog tore him down.
The wolf and the dog were still fighting when Hugh, the woodman, came in
and killed the wicked wolf with his axe.

[Illustration: DEATH OF THE WOLF.]


_DEATH OF THE WOLF._

Little Red Riding-Hood threw her arms round the woodman Hugh's neck and
kissed him, and thanked him again and again.

"Oh, you good, kind Hugh," she said, "how did you know the wolf was
here, in time to save me?"

"Well," said Hugh, "when you were gone by, I remembered that a wolf had
been seen about the wood lately, and I thought I would just come after
you and see if you were safe. When we came near grandmother's house Trim
sniffed and ran to the door and whined, and then he pushed it open--you
had not shut it close--and rushed in, and I followed him, and between us
we have killed the wolf."

Then Hugh took the child home, and her mother and father could not thank
him enough for saving Little Red Riding-Hood.




PUSS IN BOOTS.


Once upon a time there was a miller who had three sons. When he died he
left his mill to the eldest son, his ass to the second son, and his cat
to the youngest, who had always been his favourite.

The two eldest sons resolved to live together; but they would not let
their brother live with them, because he had only a cat. So the poor lad
was very sorrowful, and wondered what he should do to get his bread.
While he was sitting thinking about it, Puss jumped up on the table, and
touched him with her paw.

[Illustration: PUSS CONSOLING THE MILLER'S SON.]

"My dear master," she said, "do not fret. I will get your living for
you. Only you must buy me a pair of boots and give me a bag."

[Illustration: PUSS CATCHING THE RABBITS.]

The miller's son had very little money, but he thought it such a
wonderful thing to hear a cat talk that he could not refuse her request.
So he took Puss to the shoemaker's, and got him to make her a very smart
pair of boots, and then he gave her a nice large bag.


_THE RABBIT WARREN._

Now, not far from the mill there was a rabbit warren, and Puss resolved
to catch some rabbits for dinner. So she put some lettuce leaves and
fine parsley into her bag, went into the warren, and held the bag very
quietly open, hiding herself behind it. And little greedy rabbits, who
knew no better, ran into it, to have a feast. Directly they were safe
in, Puss pulled the string of the bag, and carried them off to her
master. The miller's son killed them, and cooked one for dinner; but
Puss took away the other, which was a very fine one, and hung it up for
their next day's meal.

But although their larder was thus provided, early the next day Puss
took her bag and went again into the warren, and in the same manner
caught two more fine young rabbits. But instead of carrying them home
she walked to the king's palace and knocked at the door.


_PUSS AT THE PALACE._

The king's porter asked who was there. "I have brought a present to the
king," said Puss. "Please let me see his majesty."

The porter let her in, and when Puss came into the king's presence she
made a low bow, and, taking a fine rabbit out of her bag, said, "My Lord
Marquis of Carrabas sends this rabbit to your majesty with his
respects."

[Illustration: PUSS MAKES A PRESENT TO THE KING.]

"I am much obliged to the marquis," said the king, and he ordered his
head cook to dress the rabbit for dinner.

[Illustration: PUSS CALLS ON THE OGRE.]

By the king's side sat his daughter, a very beautiful lady. She ordered
one of the attendants to give Puss a good cup of cream, which she
liked very much; and she went home and told her master all she had done.
The miller's son laughed; but every morning Puss caught a rabbit, and
carried it to the palace with the same message.


_THE OGRE._

Now, in that country there lived a cruel ogre, who used to eat children,
so everybody was afraid of him; but nobody could kill him, he was such a
giant. One day Puss went to call on him. He received her civilly, for he
did not care to eat cats, so Puss sat down, and began to talk:--"I
hear," she said, "great Ogre, that you are so clever, that you can turn
yourself into any creature you please."

"Yes, so I can," said the ogre.

"Dear me," said Puss, "how much I should like to see your ogreship do
it."

Then the ogre, who liked to show how clever he was, turned himself into
a lion, and roared so loudly that Puss was quite frightened, and jumped
out of the way. Then he changed back into an ogre again. Puss praised
him a great deal, and then said, "Can your ogreship become a small
animal as well as a large one?"

"Oh, yes," said the vain ogre; and he changed himself into a little
mouse. Directly Puss saw him in this form she jumped at him and killed
him on the spot.


_THE MARQUIS OF CARRABAS._

Then Puss ran home and bade her master go and bathe in the river, and he
should see what she would do for him. The miller's son obeyed; and while
he was in the water, Puss took away all his clothes, and hid them under
a large stone. Now, the king's carriage came in sight soon after, just
as Puss had expected, for he always drove in that direction, and
directly she saw it, she began to cry very loudly, "Help, help, for
my Lord the Marquis of Carrabas." The king put his head out, and asked
what was the matter.

[Illustration: PUSS ASKS HELP FOR HIS MASTER.]

"Oh, your majesty," said Puss, "my master the marquis was bathing, and
some one has taken away his clothes. He will catch the cramp and be
drowned."

[Illustration: PUSS THREATENS THE REAPERS.]

Then the king ordered one of his attendants to ride back to the palace
and get a suit of his own clothes for the marquis, "who had so often
sent him gifts," he said. And when they were brought, Puss took them to
her master, and helped him to dress in them.


_PUSS FRIGHTENS THE REAPERS._

The miller's son looked quite like a gentleman in the king's clothes,
and when he went to thank his majesty for them, the king asked him to
get into the coach and he would drive him home. Then Puss told the
coachman where to go, and ran on before and came to some reapers.
"Reapers," said she, "if the king asks you whose field this is, say it
belongs to the Marquis of Carrabas; if you don't say so, you shall be
chopped up as small as mincemeat."

The reapers were so frightened that they promised to obey her. And she
ran on and told all the other labourers on the road to say the same. So
when the king asked, "To whom do these fine fields belong?" the reapers
answered, "To the Marquis of Carrabas." The herdsmen said the same of
the cattle, and the king, turning to the miller's son, said, "My lord,
you have a fine property." But all had belonged really to the ogre, for
it was to his castle the cunning cat had told the coachman to drive.


_THE CASTLE._

At last the coach stopped at the Ogre's castle, and Puss came out, and
bowing very low, said, "Your majesty and the princess are welcome to
the castle of my Lord Marquis of Carrabas."

[Illustration: THE KING AND PRINCESS VISIT THE MARQUIS.]

The king was delighted, for it was indeed a very nice castle, full of
riches. They sat down to a great feast, which Puss ordered to be served,
and the king was so pleased with the miller's son and thought him such a
good match for the princess, that he invited him to court, and in a
little while gave him his daughter for his wife, and made him a prince.

[Illustration: MARRIAGE OF THE MARQUIS AND PRINCESS.]

You may be quite sure that the miller's son was very grateful to Puss
for his good fortune, and she never had to catch mice for her dinner any
more, for dainty meat and the best cream were every day given to Puss in
Boots.




OLD MOTHER HUBBARD.


   Old Mother Hubbard
   Went to the cupboard
     To get her poor Dog a bone;
   But when she came there
   The cupboard was bare,
     And so the poor Dog had none.

[Illustration: OLD MOTHER HUBBARD AND HER DOG.]

   She went to the baker's
     To buy him some bread,
   But when she came back
     The poor Dog looked dead.

[Illustration: THE DOG LOOKING DEAD.]

   She went to the hatter's
     To buy him a hat,
   But when she came back
     He was feeding the cat.

   She went to the barber's
     To buy him a wig,
   But when she came back
     He was dancing a jig.

   She went to the joiner's
     To buy him a coffin,
   But when she came back
     The poor Dog was laughing.

   She took a clean dish
     To get him some tripe,
   But when she came back
     He was smoking a pipe.

[Illustration: THE DOG SMOKING A PIPE.]

[Illustration: THE DOG STANDING ON HIS HEAD.]

   She went to the ale-house
     To get him some beer,
   But when she came back
     The Dog sat in a chair.

   She went to the tavern
     For white wine and red,
   But when she came back
    The Dog stood on his head.

   She went to the fruiterer's
     To buy him some fruit,
   But when she came back
     He was playing the flute.

   She went to the tailor's,
     To buy him a coat,
   But when she came back
     He was riding a goat.

[Illustration: THE DOG PLAYING THE FLUTE.]

[Illustration: THE DOG SPINNING.]

   She went to the sempstress
     To buy him some linen,
   But when she came back
     The Dog was a-spinning.

   She went to the hosier's
     To buy him some hose,
   But when she came back
     He was dressed in his clothes.

   She went to the cobbler's
     To buy him some shoes,
   But when she came back
     He was reading the news.

   The Dame made a curtsey,
     The Dog made a bow;
   The Dame said, "Your servant;"
     The Dog said, "Bow-wow!"

[Illustration: THE DOG READING THE NEWS.]

[Illustration: THE DOG MADE A BOW.]

   This wonderful Dog
     Was Dame Hubbard's delight;
   He could sing, he could dance,
     He could read, he could write.

   So she gave him rich dainties
     Whenever he fed,
   And erected a monument
     When he was dead.




COCK ROBIN.


   Who killed Cock Robin?
     I, said the Sparrow,
     With my bow and arrow.
   I killed Cock Robin.

[Illustration: THE SPARROW, COCK ROBIN, AND THE FISH.]

[Illustration: THE LINNET, THE DOVE, AND COCK ROBIN.]

   Who saw him die?
     I, said the Fly,
     With my little eye.
   I saw him die.

   Who caught his blood?
     I, said the Fish,
     With my little dish.
   I caught his blood.

   Who'll carry him to the grave?
     I, said the Kite,
     If it's not in the night.
   I'll carry him to the grave.

   Who'll carry the link?
     I, said the Linnet,
     I'll fetch it in a minute.
   I'll carry the link.

[Illustration: THE KITE AND COCK ROBIN.]

[Illustration: THE OWL, THE BEETLE, AND COCK ROBIN.]

   Who'll make his shroud?
     I, said the Beetle,
     With my thread and needle.
   I'll make his shroud.

   Who'll dig his grave?
     I, said the Owl,
     With my spade and shovel.
   I'll dig his grave.

   Who'll toll the bell?
     I, said the Bull,
     Because I can pull.
   I'll pull the bell.

[Illustration: THE BULL TOLLING THE BELL]

[Illustration: THE ROOK AND THE LARK]

   Who'll be the Parson?
     I, said the Rook,
     With my little book.
   I'll be the Parson.

   Who'll be the Clerk?
     I, said the Lark,
     If it's not in the dark.
   I'll be the Clerk.

   Who'll be chief mourner?
     I, said the Dove,
     For I mourn for my love.
   I'll be chief mourner.

   Who'll sing a psalm?
     I, said the Thrush,
     As she sat in a bush.
   I'll sing a psalm.

[Illustration: THE THRUSH.]

[Illustration: SIGHING AND SOBBING FOR POOR COCK ROBIN.]

   All the birds of the air
     Fell a-sighing and sobbing
   When they heard the bell toll
     For poor Cock Robin.




JACK & THE BEAN-STALK.


Once upon a time there was a poor widow who lived in a little cottage
with her only son Jack.

[Illustration: JACK SELLS A COW FOR SOME BEANS.]

Jack was a giddy, thoughtless boy, but very kind-hearted and
affectionate. There had been a hard winter, and after it the poor woman
had suffered from fever and ague. Jack did no work as yet, and by
degrees they grew dreadfully poor. The widow saw that there was no means
of keeping Jack and herself from starvation but by selling her cow; so
one morning she said to her son, "I am too weak to go myself, Jack, so
you must take the cow to market for me, and sell her." Jack liked going
to market to sell the cow very much; but as he was on the way, he met a
butcher who had some beautiful beans in his hand. Jack stopped to look
at them, and the butcher told the boy that they were of great value, and
persuaded him to sell the cow for them! And Jack was so silly as to
consent to this foolish bargain.

[Illustration: THE BEAN-STALK GROWS OUT OF SIGHT IN A NIGHT.]

When he brought them home to his mother instead of the money she
expected for her nice cow, she was very vexed and shed many tears,
scolding Jack for his folly. He was very sorry; but, he said, he might
as well make the best of his bargain, so he put the seed-beans into the
ground close by the side of the steep hill under shelter of which their
cottage was built, and went to bed. The next morning when he got up, he
found that the beans had grown, till the bean stalks reached right over
the top of the hill, and were lost to his sight. Greatly surprised, he
called his mother, and they both gazed in silent wonder at the
bean-stalk, which was not only of great height, but was thick enough to
bear Jack's weight.

"I wonder where it goes?" said Jack to his mother; "I think I will climb
up and see."

His mother wished him not to venture up this strange ladder, but Jack
coaxed her to give her consent to the attempt, for he was certain there
must be something wonderful in the bean-stalk.

Jack instantly began to climb, and went up and up on the ladder-like
bean till every thing he had left behind him, the cottage, the village,
and even the tall church tower, looked quite little, and still he did
not see the top of the bean stalk.

Jack felt a little tired, and thought for a moment that he would go back
again; but he was a very persevering boy, and he knew that the way to
succeed in anything is not to give up. So after resting for a moment he
went on, and at last reached the top of the bean, and found himself in a
beautiful country, finely wooded; and not far from the place where he
had got off the bean-stalk stood a fine and strong castle.

Jack wondered very much that he had never heard of or seen this castle
before; but when he reflected on the subject, he saw that it was as much
separated from the village by the perpendicular rock on which it stood
as if it were in another land.

While Jack was standing looking at the castle, a very strange-looking
woman came out of the wood and advanced towards him.

[Illustration: JACK CLIMBS THE BEAN-STALK.]

Jack took off his hat to the old lady, and she said, pointing to the
castle, "Boy, that castle belongs to you. A wicked giant killed your
father, and took it from your mother; try and win it back from the
monster who now has it." As she ceased speaking she suddenly
disappeared, and of course Jack knew she was a fairy.

[Illustration: JACK ASKS ABOUT THE CASTLE.]

He was much surprised; however, he walked up to the castle door and
knocked, and an old giantess came out. She did not wait till he spoke,
but pulled him in at once, for she thought he would make a nice supper
for her when her husband was asleep. Just at that moment, however, she
heard the giant's step approaching, so she put Jack into a press, and
told him to hide there, or the giant would eat him. As soon as the Ogre
came in, he cried in a terrible voice

   "Fee, fa, fie, fo, fum,
   I smell the breath of an Englishman."

"Oh!" said his wife, "there is nobody here. You only smell a crow that
is flying over the chimney." Then the giant sat down to dinner, which
was quite ready, and when he had eaten a whole sheep, he said, "Bring me
my hen."

The giantess brought a hen, and put it on the table before him, and then
she went away. "Lay," said the giant to the hen, and she laid a golden
egg. Jack could see quite plainly through a little hole which he had
bored in the door. Three times the giant said "Lay," and each time the
hen laid a solid gold egg. Then the Ogre, being drowsy, shut his eyes,
and soon snored very loudly. Directly Jack found that the giant was
asleep, he stole out of the press, caught up the hen, ran out of the
room, opened the door of the castle, which the giant had left ajar, and
descended the bean-stalk as fast as he could go. His mother was glad to
see him again, and much surprised at seeing the hen, which laid them
three gold eggs every day. Jack's mother took them to the next town and
sold them, and soon grew quite rich. Some time afterwards Jack made
another journey up the bean-stalk to the giant's castle; but first he
dyed his hair and disguised himself. The old woman did not know him
again, and dragged him in as she had done before to eat him by-and-by;
but once more she heard her husband coming and hid him in the press, not
thinking that it was the same boy who had stolen the hen. She put him
into the same press, and bade him stay quite still there, or the giant
would eat him.

[Illustration: THE HEN THAT LAYS GOLDEN EGGS.]

Then the giant came in, saying:

   "Fee, fa, fie, fo, fum,
   I smell the breath of an Englishman."

"Oh!" said his wife, "it is only the cowherd, who has just been here. We
cannot spare him for your dinner."

[Illustration: JACK TAKES THE GIANT'S MONEY-BAGS.]

Then the giant sat down, and when he had eaten half an ox, he told his
wife to bring his money-bags to him. She instantly went and fetched two
large bags full of gold; and then left him to go about her usual
house-work.

The Ogre counted out the gold twice over, and then put it into the bags
and tied them up. In a few minutes Jack heard him snore. He directly
crept out of the press, seized the bags, and hurrying out of the castle,
carried them home quite safely. Jack's mother was glad to see him safe
at home again, and for a long time she would not let him go up the
bean-stalk; but Jack knew he had not yet obeyed the fairy's command to
win back the castle, so after a time he set off once more on this
adventure, and tapped again at the castle door.

The giantess, who was very stupid, did not know him again, but she
stopped a minute before she took him in. She feared another robbery; but
Jack's fresh cheeks looked so tempting that she could not resist him,
and so she bade him come in.

But at that moment she heard her husband's step approaching.

Afraid of losing her supper, the Ogress at once shut Jack in the press;
and she had hardly hidden him when the giant came in, saying as usual,

   "Fee, fa, fie, fo, fum,
   I smell the blood of an Englishman."

"Oh no!" said his wife, "it is only the shepherd, who has been up with a
sheep for your dinner."

The giant sat down, and when he had eaten a whole sheep he said, "I
should like some music; bring me my harp."

The Ogress went and brought a golden harp to him, set it on the table,
and went away. Then the Ogre said, "Play," to the harp, and it played so
delightfully that Jack was charmed.

[Illustration: JACK TAKES THE TALKING HARP.]

By-and-by, however, the giant snored so loud that he could not hear the
music; and Jack quickly stole out, and seizing the harp, ran away with
it. But the harp was a fairy belonging to the giant, and as Jack ran, it
cried out, "Master! Master!" The giant woke up slowly and rushed after
Jack, but the boy was very nimble and outran him. You may imagine how
fast Jack went down the bean-stalk this time, hearing all the while
the tramp of the giant's feet behind him.

[Illustration: THE GIANT BREAKS HIS NECK.]

Just as he reached the bottom he saw the Ogre looking down on him.

The next moment his great feet were on the bean-stalk.

"Mother, mother! bring me the axe," cried Jack.

His mother hastened with it, and just as the giant was half way down the
bean-stalk, Jack succeeded in chopping it in halves; the lower half
fell; the upper half swung away, and the giant, losing his hold, fell
heavily to the ground on his head and broke his neck.

The same moment the fairy again stood beside Jack, and touching the
broken bean-stalk was turned into a flight of broad, easy steps.

"Go up," she said, "and take possession of your own home, so long kept
from you. The Ogress is dead, and there is no more danger. You have been
brave and good. May you be happy."

Jack thanked the fairy very warmly for her aid, and she again departed
to Fairyland, after explaining to Jack that she had been the butcher who
sold him the beans.




TOM THUMB.


In the days of good king Arthur there lived a countryman and his wife
who, though they had plenty to eat and to drink, and a very comfortable
cottage to live in, were not at all happy.

They had no children, and they both wished very much for a baby. The
wife was often in tears when her husband was out at work and she was all
alone, because she had not an infant to take care of and nurse. One day,
as she sat weeping by herself, more than usually sad, she said aloud,
"If I only had a dear little baby, I should not care what it was like. I
should be thankful for one if it were _no bigger than my husband's
thumb_."

Now it happened that the Queen of the Fairies was passing by, though the
poor woman could not see her, and as she knew the farmer's wife was kind
to the poor and likely to be a good mother, she thought she would grant
her wish.

[Illustration: THE FARMER'S WIFE CRYING BECAUSE SHE HAS NO BABY.]

So about an hour or two afterwards the woman was much surprised to see
standing by the table a very beautiful lady, dressed splendidly, with a
glittering star on her forehead and a wand in her right hand, with a
gem of great brilliancy at the top of it. But what delighted the woman
most of all was a tiny cradle, made of a walnut shell, lined with
velvet, in which lay the prettiest baby ever seen, but it was only just
as large as a man's thumb. "See," said the fairy, "your wish is granted.
Here is a baby for you. Take care of it; it is your own." The woman did
not know how to thank the fairy enough; she was so delighted, and the
queen went away quite pleased at having given so much happiness.

[Illustration: THE FAIRY QUEEN BRINGING TOM THUMB TO HIS MOTHER.]

Before the fairy went away, however, she gave the woman a little shirt
of spider's web and a doublet of thistle-down for the baby.

When the farmer came home he was very much pleased. He invited all his
friends to the christening, and the child was named "Tom," after him,
and "Thumb," because he was no bigger than one.

The baby was very well, and merry, and grew, of course; but still it was
very small.

However, at last Tom thought himself quite a great boy, and begged his
mother to make him a little suit of clothes, and she made him one; but
with a great deal of trouble, they were so small.

Tom was very often in mischief. He was so small that his mother used to
put him on the table to play; and once she found him in the salt-box.

[Illustration: TOM FALLS INTO THE PUDDING.]

One day she was making a plum-pudding, and Tom stood by the side of the
basin, and peeped over the edge; but he could not see into it very well,
and while his mother was gone for some more flour, he drew himself up on
the edge of the basin. Alas! he fell in and disappeared in the wet
pudding, which for poor Tom was a huge morass.

[Illustration: THE FALL OF THE PUDDING.]

Tom would have cried out, but the pudding stuck his lips together, and
his mother not missing him, stirred him up in the mixture, and put it
and him into the pot. Tom no sooner felt the hot water than he danced
about like mad; the woman was nearly frightened out of her wits to see
the pudding come out of the pot and jump about, and she was glad to give
it to a tinker who was passing that way. The tinker took the pudding and
put it into a cloth, to carry it home to his family, who seldom tasted
such a good dish.

But by-and-by, as he was climbing over a stile, he happened to squeeze
it, and Tom, who had made quite an arch over his own head in the dry
pudding by this time, cried out from the middle of it, "Hallo, Pickens!"
which so terrified the tinker that he let the pudding drop in the field
and scampered off as fast as he could. The pudding fell to pieces in the
fall, and Tom, creeping out, went home to his mother, whom he found in
great trouble, because she could not find him.

After this accident, Tom's mother never let him stay near her while she
was cooking, but she was obliged to take him with her when she went out
milking, for she dared not trust the little man in the house alone.

A few days after his escape from the pudding, Tom went, with his mother,
into the fields to milk the cows, and for fear he should be blown away
by the wind, she tied him to a thistle with a small piece of thread.

[Illustration: THE COW EATS TOM.]

Very soon after, a cow eat up the thistle and swallowed Tom Thumb. His
mother was in sad grief again; but Tom scratched and kicked in the cow's
throat till she was glad to throw him out of her mouth again, and he was
not at all hurt; but his mother became very anxious about her small son,
who now gave her a great deal of trouble. Sometimes he fell into the
milk-pail and was nearly drowned in the milk; once he was nearly killed
by an angry chicken, and another time had a narrow escape from a cat.

[Illustration: THE EAGLE FLIES AWAY WITH TOM.]

One day Tom went ploughing with his father, who gave him a whip made of
a barley straw, to drive the oxen with; but an eagle, flying by, caught
him up in his beak, and carried him to the top of a great giant's
castle, and dropped him on the leads. The giant was walking on the
battlements and thought at first that it was a foreign bird which lay at
his feet, but soon seeing that it was a small man, he picked Tom up with
his finger and thumb, and put the poor little creature into his great
mouth, but the fairy dwarf scratched the roof of the giant's mouth, and
bit his great tongue, and held on by his teeth till the ogre, in a
passion, took him out again and threw him over into the sea, which ran
beneath the castle walls. Here a very large fish swallowed him up
directly.

Tom did not at all like swimming about in the fish, but by-and-by he
felt it drawn upwards, and guessed at once that it was caught. And so it
was; and being a very large fish, the fisherman thought it would make a
good present for his beloved King Arthur. So he took it to the palace
and begged the king to accept it.

King Arthur was pleased with the poor man's affection, and ordered the
fish to be carried to the kitchen and cooked for his own dinner. The
fisherman took it to the cook, who admired it very much, but said it was
very heavy. Then he laid it on a table and began to cut it open. You may
imagine how he jumped with fear and wonder when Tom Thumb slipped out of
the fish!

The cook's cries brought the other servants, and soon everybody near ran
to behold this wonder--the tiny man who came out of the fish.

Tom begged for some water to wash himself, and when he was clean, the
courtiers thought him so pretty and such a marvel that they ran to tell
the king about him.

[Illustration: TOM COMES OUT OF THE FISH.]

Arthur was very much surprised; but he desired them to send the little
man up after dinner to see him, and the Court tailor made haste at once
to get ready a Court suit for Tom, which did not take him long to
make; there were so few stitches in it!

[Illustration: KING ARTHUR RECEIVING TOM THUMB.]

As soon as the king's great punch-bowl was set on the royal table, Tom
Thumb was carried to see the monarch, who was delighted with the little
man. Tom walked on the King's hand, and danced on the Queen's. He became
a great favourite with Arthur, who made him a knight. Such is the
wonderful history of Tom Thumb, who did much good when he grew older,
and thus proved that however small people are, they may be of use in the
world. He was good and kind to his parents, and to everybody; and the
old ballad says,--

   "Such were his deeds and noble acts
     In Arthur's court there shone,
   As like in all the world beside
     Was hardly seen or known."




CINDERELLA.


Cinderella's mother died while she was a very little child, leaving her
to the care of her father and her step-sisters, who were very much older
than herself; for Cinderella's father had been twice married, and her
mother was his second wife. Now, Cinderella's sisters did not love her,
and were very unkind to her. As she grew older they made her work as a
servant, and even sift the cinders; on which account they used to call
her in mockery "Cinderella." It was not her real name, but she became
afterwards so well known by it that her proper one has been forgotten.

She was a very sweet-tempered, good girl, however, and everybody (except
her cruel sisters) loved her.

[Illustration: CINDERELLA AT HOME.]

It happened, when Cinderella was about seventeen years old, that the
King of that country gave a ball, to which all ladies of the land,
and among the rest the young girl's sisters, were invited. And they made
her dress them for the ball, but never thought of allowing her to go
there.

[Illustration: CINDERELLA DRESSING HER SISTERS FOR THE BALL.]

"I wish you would take me to the ball with you," said Cinderella,
meekly.

"Take you, indeed!" answered the elder sister, with a sneer; "it is no
place for a cinder-sifter: stay at home and do your work."

When they were gone, Cinderella, whose heart was very sad, sat down and
cried bitterly; but as she sat sorrowful, thinking of the unkindness of
her sisters, a voice called to her from the garden, and she went out to
see who was there. It was her godmother, a good old Fairy.

"Do not cry, Cinderella," she said; "you also shall go to the ball,
because you are a kind, good girl. Bring me a large pumpkin."

Cinderella obeyed, and the Fairy, touching it with her wand, turned it
into a grand coach. Then she desired Cinderella to go to the trap, and
bring her a rat. The girl obeyed, and a touch of the Fairy's wand turned
him into a very smart coachman. Two mice were turned into footmen; four
grasshoppers into white horses. Next, the Fairy touched Cinderella's
rags, and they became rich satin robes, trimmed with point lace.
Diamonds shone in her hair and on her neck and arms, and her kind
godmother thought she had seldom seen so lovely a girl. Her old shoes
became a charming pair of glass slippers, which shone like diamonds.

"Now go to the ball, my love," she said, "and enjoy yourself. But
remember, you must leave the room before the clock strikes _eleven_. If
you do not your dress will return to its original rags. I approve of
pleasure, but not of dissipation, and I expect that you will show your
gratitude by obeying me."

Cinderella kissed and thanked her godmother. Then she stepped into her
coach and drove off, with her footmen behind, in great style. The Fairy,
when she was gone, returned to Fairyland.

Cinderella was received at the King's palace with great respect. The
Lord Chamberlain bowed low to her, thinking she must be a very great
lady by her dress and carriage, and he showed her at once into the
ball-room.

[Illustration: THE FAIRY GODMOTHER.]

She was so beautiful that everybody looked at her, and wondered who she
was; and the Prince asked her to dance with him, and afterwards would
dance with no one else.

[Illustration: ARRIVAL AT THE PALACE.]

But she made haste to leave a little before the hour fixed, and had time
to undress before her sisters came home. They told her a beautiful
Princess had been at the ball, with whom the Prince was delighted. They
did not know it was Cinderella herself, and she was amused to hear them
admire her grace and beauty, and say that they were sure she was a royal
lady.

The Prince was quite vexed when supper-time came, and he could not find
his beautiful partner, and no one had seen her leave the room. But in
hopes of beholding her again, he persuaded the King to give another
grand ball. As soon as her sisters were gone to it, Cinderella's
godmother arrived.

"You were so good and obedient last time, that I shall let you go out
again," said she to the young girl.

And once more the rat, mice, grasshoppers, and pumpkin (which had gone
back to their original shapes after the first ball) were turned into the
grand carriage and attendants, and Cinderella, in rose-coloured satin
and rubies, went to the royal ball.

Directly the Prince saw her, he asked her to dance, and would have no
other partner, and as he led her past her two unkind sisters, she saw
them look at her dress with envious eyes, and knew that they wished they
were as beautiful, and as well-dressed as she was.

But in the midst of her enjoyment, Cinderella remembered the Fairy's
command, and at half-past ten glided out of the room, and drove home
again. Her sisters found her waiting to undress them in her usual rags,
and kept her up to tell her how beautiful the unknown Princess was, and
how well she was dressed.

Again the Prince was vexed at the sudden disappearance of the beautiful
stranger, and once more he persuaded the King to give a grand State
ball.

"I wonder if Princess Beauty will be there!" said the sisters to
Cinderella. "We must have new dresses, for she is so splendid. She makes
every one look shabby."

[Illustration: CINDERELLA DANCES WITH THE PRINCE.]

Cinderella smiled as she helped them to dress. She was sure the Fairy
would let her go to the ball too. And she was right. Her godmother,
pleased with her obedience, came in good time, and Cinderella, dressed
in blue satin and pearls, went in the same style as before.

[Illustration: CINDERELLA RUNS HOME AND LOSES HER SLIPPER.]

The Prince would scarcely let her out of his sight, and Cinderella, who
was getting a little spoiled by all the flattery she heard, began to
think more of herself and less of the Fairy; so the time stole on, till
glancing up at the clock, she saw it wanted only five minutes to eleven.

At once she darted out of the room, and ran through the palace as fast
as she could go, but as she reached the hall, she lost one of her
precious glass slippers! She did not stop to pick it up, but rushed to
the door. Alas! the clock had struck ELEVEN. She found no coach, only a
pumpkin, and the rat and mice ran quickly away when they saw her; while
all her fine dress turned to rags, and she had to run home alone in the
darkness of the night.

The Prince was very much surprised when he missed Cinderella again, and
leaving the ball, went in search of her. He asked all the attendants,
but no one had seen her, and when enquiry was made of the porter, he
said that no one had gone out of the palace except a poor ragged
beggar-girl.

However, the Prince's search was rewarded by his finding the glass
slipper, which he well knew belonged to the unknown Princess. He loved
Cinderella so much that he now resolved to marry her; and as he felt
sure that no one else could wear such a tiny shoe as hers was, he sent
out a herald to proclaim that whichever lady in his kingdom could put on
this glass slipper should be his wife.

All the great ladies who wished to be a Princess tried to put it on, but
in vain. Cinderella's sisters tried, but could not get it on, and then
Cinderella asked if she might try. They laughed at her; but the Prince,
hearing of her wish, sent for her. She went with her sisters in her poor
dress, but very clean, and at once put on the slipper. Then she drew the
fellow of it from her pocket, and slipped it on her other foot.

The Prince, who had thought the moment he saw her that the poor girl was
very much like the beautiful Princess, was delighted. He insisted on
Cinderella telling him her story, which she did very modestly, and all
listened with wonder.

[Illustration: CINDERELLA TRIES ON THE SLIPPER.]

As her tale ended, the Fairy godmother suddenly entered the room, and
placing her godchild's hand in the Prince's, said:

"Take this young girl for your wife, Prince; she is good and patient,
and as she has known how to submit to injustice meekly, she will know
how to reign justly."

[Illustration: CINDERELLA MARRIED TO THE PRINCE.]

So Cinderella was married to the Prince in great state, and they lived
together very happily. She forgave her sisters, and treated them always
very kindly, and the Prince had great cause to be glad that he had found
the glass slipper.




THE THREE BEARS.


Once upon a time three bears lived in a nice little house in a great
forest.

There was the Father Bear, the Mother Bear, and the Baby Bear.

They had each a bed to sleep in, a chair to sit on, and a basin and
spoon for eating milk or honey, which was their favourite food.

One morning the three bears resolved on taking a walk before breakfast;
but before they went out, they poured their warm milk into their basins,
that it might get cool by the time they came back.

[Illustration: THE BEARS AT BREAKFAST.]

When the milk was poured out, the three bears set out for a walk.

[Illustration: THE BEARS OUT FOR A WALK.]

Mr. and Mrs. Bear walked arm-in-arm, and Baby ran by their side.

"WHAT A FINE DAY IT IS!" growled Mr. Bear.

"WHAT A FINE DAY IT IS!" said Mrs. Bear.

"What a fine day!" squeaked little Bear.

And so it was.

The sun shone brightly though it was low in the sky, and its rays
glittered on the fine webs on the grass. The leaves shivered in the soft
breeze; the wood-pigeon cooed; the lark sang loud enough to make himself
hoarse; the sparrows chirped; the bee buzzed, and a yellow butterfly
perched on great Bear's nose.

"What a squeaky noise these creatures make!" said big Bear, as he
brushed off the butterfly. "What a pity it is they have not _our_ deep
voices."

"Yes," said Mrs. Bear; "you have a much finer voice than the lark. I
should like to hear him growl as you do."

"Oh, my dear, you are too kind; my growl is nothing to the lion's."

And thus conversing, the bears walked on.

Now there lived in the same forest a sweet little girl, who was called
Golden Hair. She was the Woodman's daughter, and her hair looked just
like sunbeams. She knew every tree in the greenwood, and every flower in
it. She loved the birds, and liked to listen to their song; and
everything in the wood loved Golden Hair. The trees bent down their
lower branches to touch her glittering head as she passed; the birds
sang sweeter as she glided by. The lark's song in the sky was--

"Come up, come up, Golden Hair; here is your happy home."

"Coo, I love you; coo, I love you!" cooed the wood-pigeon, as she
passed.

"Twit, twit, pretty child," said the sparrow.

"Oh, you darling," sang the blackbird; and Golden Hair laughed with
glee, for she liked to be loved.

[Illustration: LITTLE GOLDEN HAIR.]

As to the butterflies, they flew after her, and rested on her hair, and
tickled her cheeks; but she never tried to catch them.

[Illustration: GOLDEN HAIR PEEPING INTO THE BEARS' HOUSE.] She would
not frighten or vex them for anything. She loved all the creatures, and
that is why they loved her.

Love makes love.

Dear little Golden Hair, she went on singing merrily through the
greenwood, saying sometimes to herself--

"I wish I could sing as well as the lark!"

By-and-by Little Golden Hair reached the Bears' house. She had never
seen it before, and she wondered who lived there. A window was open, and
Golden Hair peeped in.

"Dear me," thought the child, "whose house can it be! There is a table
and three chairs, and three basins of hot milk, all steaming, and nobody
to drink it. But I don't see any work or books, or anything else. I
think I will go in and see who lives here."

So she tapped at the door, and cried, "Is any one at home?"

But there was no answer. Then Golden Hair stepped in very carefully,
and looked about her.

She could not see any one, nor hear anybody snoring, so she walked into
the Bears' parlour.

There was a fire, which made the room cheerful, and the hot milk looked
very inviting; it quite seemed to say, "Come and have some breakfast;"
and the early spring air had made Golden Hair rather cold, and very
hungry; so she sat down by the fire in the little Bear's chair. It was
too small for her, but she did not quite sit down at first. In a moment
she got up again, and went round the table and tasted the milk in all
the basins. Little Bear's was the nicest, because it had sugar in it,
and Golden Hair thought it was good. So she took the basin and sat down
again in Little Bear's chair, took his spoon, and ate up _all_ his milk.
Now this was very wrong. A tiny bear is only a tiny bear; still, he has
a right to keep his own things. But Golden Hair did not know any better.
Unluckily, Baby Bear's chair was, as we have said, too small for her;
she broke the seat and fell through, basin and all.

[Illustration: GOLDEN HAIR EATS THE LITTLE BEAR'S BREAKFAST.]

Then Golden Hair went upstairs, and there she saw three beds all in a
row. Golden Hair lay down on Father Bear's bed first, but that was too
long for her; then she lay down on Mother Bear's bed, and that was too
wide for her; last of all she lay down on Baby Bear's bed, and there she
fell asleep, for she was tired.

[Illustration: THE LITTLE BEAR GRIEVES FOR HIS BROKEN CHAIR.]

By-and-by the bears came home. Baby Bear saw that his chair was broken
and thrown down, and he cried in a very squeaky voice,

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN HERE;" and Father Bear growled,

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN HERE;"

And Mother Bear growled, more softly,

"SOMEBODY HAS BEEN HERE."

Then they went to the table and looked at their breakfasts, and Father
Bear growled, "WHO HAS TOUCHED MY BASIN?"

And Mother Bear growled, "WHO HAS TOUCHED MY BASIN?"

And Tiny Bear squeaked, "SOMEBODY HAS BROKEN MINE!"

And then Tiny Bear began to cry, for he was very fond of his own basin
and his own chair; and, besides, he was very hungry after his long walk
in the forest.

It really did seem a shame. Then the three bears thought they would go
over their house, to see who had been in it, and to try if they could
find the thief.

They went upstairs to their bedroom, which was over their other room,
and as soon as they saw the tumbled beds Father Bear growled,

"WHO HAS BEEN LYING ON MY BED?"

And Mother Bear growled

"WHO HAS BEEN LYING ON MY BED?"

And Tiny Bear squeaked out,

"Oh! here is a little girl in my bed; and it must be she who has eaten
my breakfast and broken my chair."

[Illustration: THE BEARS FIND GOLDEN HAIR IN LITTLE BEAR'S BED.]

Then Father Bear growled,

"LET US EAT HER UP;"

And Mother Bear growled, "LET US EAT HER UP;"

And Tiny Bear squeaked,

"LET US EAT HER UP."

[Illustration: GOLDEN HAIR ESCAPES FROM THE BEARS.]

The noise they made woke Golden Hair, and you may imagine how frightened
she was when she saw the three bears. She started out of bed, and jumped
at once out of the window. The bears rushed after her, and Father Bear
caught her golden hair in his teeth, but she left a lock behind, and
still ran on. Then the three bears all jumped out after her, but they
fell one on the top of the other and rolled over and over, and while
they were picking themselves up, little Golden Hair ran home, and they
were not able to catch her.

But I do not think she had acted rightly (though she did not deserve to
be eaten up); it was very wrong to break little Bear's chair and eat his
milk, and I think Golden Hair will have to take great care to keep out
of the reach of the THREE BEARS.




PUNCH AND JUDY.


   Mr. Punch and his wife
   Led a terrible life,
     Very much like a dog and a cat;
   Till, one summer morn
   A baby was born,
     A darling all dimples and fat.

[Illustration: PUNCH, JUDY, AND THE BABY.]

   Mrs. Judy was proud,
   And the nurses allowed
     That they never had seen such a child;
   And the proud mother thought
   When her baby she brought
     To her husband, "It must make him mild."

[Illustration: PUNCH AND THE BABY.]

   Mr. Punch was quite pleased;
   The poor baby he seized,
     And danced up and down in great joy.
   "Oh, my Judy," he cried,
   "With a father's just pride,
     I look on our beautiful boy."

   But the baby soon cried;
   Punch's temper was tried,
     And in a great passion he flew;
   He shook the poor child,
   And, with rage growing wild,
     The babe o'er the balcony threw.

   Judy, greatly displeased,
   A thick stick at once seized,
     And began her stern husband to beat;
   "O you monster," she cried,
   As her weapon she plied,
     "You deserve the same ending to meet."

[Illustration: PUNCH AND JUDY.]

   On his arms and his head
   Her blows fell like lead;
     She wonder'd such treatment he stood!
   Beating and battering,
   She made such a clattering,
     It sounded like chopping up wood.

[Illustration: PUNCH KILLS JUDY.]

   Of his beating quite tired,
   Punch's patience expired;
     He snatched the stick out of her hands,
   And gave Judy a blow
   Which, alas, laid her low,
     And above her a conqueror stands.

   Then he danced and he sang,
   And such nonsense began,
     That we laughed, though we couldn't tell why;
   For in such a sad case
   It were much more our place
     For Judy's misfortunes to cry.

[Illustration: PUNCH AND THE CONSTABLE.]

   But the constable see!--
   "Are you come here for me?"
     Cries Punch, as he dances about.
   "Yes, yes; come to jail,
   'Tis a terrible tale,"
     Said the constable, "you must come out,

   "And be tried for your life,
   For thus killing your wife;
     In prison, meantime, you'll abide."
   "Oh no, I won't go,"
   Cried Punch, and a blow
     He gave the poor man in his side.

[Illustration: PUNCH, TOBY, AND THE CLOWN.]

   Now Punch had a pet
   Whom we must not forget,
     A dog known as Toby by name;
   A clown from a show
   One day came to know
     If Punch would not sell him the same.

   But Punch would not part
   From his dog, for his heart
     (Though a wooden one) to him was true.
   He cried, "Give me a kiss,
   Dear Toby, I wis
     I never will sever from you."

[Illustration: PUNCH AND THE DOCTOR.]

   But Jack Ketch comes at last;
   Punch's frolics are past,
     There is no one his cause to befriend;
   His nonsense and fun
   Are all, alas, done;
     He has come to a very bad end!

   If he were not of wood
   It would not be good
     To laugh at the harm he has done;
   But 'twas only pretence,
   And there was not much sense
     In his crimes, or his grief, or his fun.

[Illustration: PUNCH AND JACK KETCH.]

   For a great many years,
   Punch's laughter and tears,
     Have amused both the child and the man;
   So I think at the last,
   For the sake of the past
     We will keep him as long as we can.




THE PETS.


_THE SHEEP._

The sheep is a very useful animal. Its wool, sheared off, makes us cloth
and flannel, and all kinds of woollen goods; and its flesh, called
mutton, is a chief part of our food. When sheep are little they are
called lambs, and are very playful, pretty creatures.

[Illustration: SHEEP.]

Sheep soon learn to know the voice of their shepherd, and will follow
it. In Eastern countries the shepherd walks before his flock, and they
are led by his voice. There are dogs called sheep-dogs, which take care
of the flocks, and protect the sheep, and keep them together. In some
countries these dogs have often to fight with wolves, which attack the
sheep and carry them off whenever they can; but the dogs are quite able
to keep the wolf away when they are trained to do so.

[Illustration: RABBITS.]

On the Scottish hills the sheep-dog is often obliged to seek his charge
in the snow-drifts, and to help get out a poor sheep or lamb which has
got buried in it. Sheep love green meadows and pure water. You remember,
I dare say, the beautiful Psalm, "The Lord is my shepherd, therefore I
shall lack nothing."


_RABBITS._

Are the favourite pets of boys. They are merry little creatures, and it
is an amusing sight to watch them running over the green turf about
their warren, when they are free. They have many enemies, however, such
as dogs, foxes, and weasels. But, in spite of their enemies, rabbits
live a merry life together.

There are a great many different kinds of tame rabbits; some are white,
with pink eyes and long ears. Rabbits have many young ones. One pair
will have fifty-six little rabbits in a year. So it is lucky many other
creatures feed on them. If they were left to increase, they would soon
eat up every stalk of corn and all the green herbs.

The native country of the rabbit is Spain. In the Orkney Islands, where
there are great numbers of rabbits, the wild ones are of a grey colour,
and in winter time almost white.

The fur of the rabbit is much used for making hats. They are good for
food also.


_THE COW._

Is a very valuable animal; indeed I do not know what we should do
without her. She gives us milk and butter, cheese and cream; her skin is
of great use, and her flesh is often eaten as beef. Cows grow fond of
those who are kind to them.

[Illustration: COW AND CALF.]

There are a great many different kinds of cows; some red, some black,
some brindled, white or spotted. Herefordshire cows have white faces.
The ancient Britons had great numbers of fine cows; and wild cattle
were common in our country seven hundred years ago. In the neighbourhood
of London, in Henry II.'s reign, there was a large forest which
contained a great many wild bulls and cows.

[Illustration: THE DONKEY.]

The cow is a good mother, very fond of her calf. The bull is a very
bold, fierce animal. It has a great dislike to the colour red, and will
run after and if it can toss any one wearing it. In Spain they have a
cruel sport, called bull fights, between these brave animals and men on
horseback.

The flesh of the cow and ox is called beef; that of the calf is veal.


_THE DONKEY._

This patient and useful animal is supposed to have come at first from
the East, where it still continues to be of a greater size and of a much
better appearance. They were as valuable there in former ages as horses;
great men and judges rode on asses. The ass is very fond of its foal,
and can be attached to its master if kindly treated. Its milk is thought
very good for consumptive people. It is very sure-footed, and strong,
and able to carry heavy burdens.

The Donkey is a very useful animal to the poor. It can do a great deal
of work on very coarse and cheap food. Thistles make a dainty dinner for
the ass. It is patient and gentle, but occasionally very obstinate; a
fault chiefly produced in the poor beast by ill-usuage.

Children should never be cruel to this poor animal, but treat it kindly,
and it will not then be stubborn and slow, but will do its best to carry
them.


_THE COCK, THE HEN, AND THE CHICKENS._

Here is a fine farm-yard family! very useful friends of ours. The cock,
who is a brave, spirited bird, wakes us up in the morning by crowing;
the hen lays us eggs for breakfast, and when the wee chicks are big
enough, they are very good food, as roast chicken. The cock teaches us
watchfulness; the hen, motherly love.

[Illustration: THE COCK, THE HEN, AND THE CHICKENS.]

There are many different kinds of fowls. The largest are the tall Cochin
Chinas; the smallest the pert little Bantams. It is a great amusement
for children to have a few fowls to feed, and take care of. Feeding them
and finding their eggs is one of the country child's pleasures.

The hen sits on her eggs for three weeks; and when the chicks are
hatched, she takes the greatest care of them, gathering them under her
wings when danger is near or the weather is at all cold; and she is
ready to fight a hawk or even a dog in defence of her little ones.

Fowls feed on barley or any kind of grain, and pick up worms, &c., in
their run. Stinging-nettles are very good food for chickens.


_THE HORSE._

This noblest of animals is believed to be a native of Arabia; but was in
our islands before the Romans came here. The first money coined in
Britain was stamped with the figure of a horse.

[Illustration: THE HORSE.]

The horse has a wonderful memory. He never forgets a place to which he
has once been taken. He loves his master if well treated; and in battles
he displays the greatest courage and joy. He also understands sounds,
and loves music. Indeed, the horse may be called the friend of man, and
deserves all the kindness we can show him.

The Arabs bring up their horses with their children in their own tents;
and the steed thus reared is very sensible and gentle. An Arab will not
sell his favourite horse for any sum, however large: it is as dear to
him as his children.


_THE GOAT._

The goat is a very useful animal. Its flesh is very good, though English
people seldom eat it. Its milk is very good also, and of use to people
in consumption. The most beautiful gloves are made from its skin.

[Illustration: GOATS.]

Goats abound on the Welsh mountains; it is, indeed, an animal that loves
the great hills. The Welsh goats are white; they are very active, and
walk on the brink of precipices, and take the most wonderful leaps. The
scent of a goat is unpleasant, but it is thought to prevent infection
amongst cattle.

Horses are very fond of goats. They are more common in France than with
us. In that country one sees a goat with nearly every flock of sheep.

Goats' flesh is called "kid." Do you remember how Jacob deceived his
father with the skin and meat of a kid of the goats?

[Illustration: PIGS.]




NURSERY SONGS.


     Little Miss Muffet
     She sat on a tuffet,
   Eating of curds and whey.
     There came a great spider,
     Who sat down beside her,
   And frightened Miss Muffet away.

[Illustration: LITTLE MISS MUFFET.]

[Illustration: PAT-A-CAKE, PAT-A-CAKE.]

   Pat-a-cake, Pat-a-cake, baker's man,
   Make me a cake as fast as you can;
   Pat it, and prick it, and mark it with T,
   And send it home for Tommy and me.

   Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,
   Humpty Dumpty had a great fall;
   All the king's horses and all the king's men
   Could not set Humpty Dumpty up again.

[Illustration: HUMPTY DUMPTY.]

[Illustration: YOUNG LAMBS TO SELL!]

   Young lambs to sell!--young lambs to sell!
   If I had as much money as I could tell,
   I never would cry, Young lambs to sell!
   Young lambs to sell!--young lambs to sell!
   I never would cry, Young lambs to sell!

[Illustration: LITTLE ROBIN REDBREAST SAT UPON A TREE.]

   Little Robin Redbreast sat upon a tree,
   Up went Pussy-cat, and down went he;
   Down came Pussy-cat, and away Robin ran;
   Says little Robin Redbreast, "Catch me if you can."
   Little Robin Redbreast jumped upon a wall,
   Pussy-cat jumped after him and almost got a fall;
   Little Robin chirped and sang, and what did Pussy say?
   Pussy-cat said "Mew," and Robin jumped away.

[Illustration: HANDY SPANDY, JACK-A-DANDY.]

   Handy Spandy Jack-a-Dandy
   Loved plumcake and sugar candy;
   He bought some at a grocer's shop,
   And out he came, hop, hop, hop.

[Illustration: LITTLE BOY BLUE.]

   Little Boy Blue, come blow up your horn,
   The sheep's in the meadow, the cow's in the corn.
   Where's the little boy that looks after the sheep?
   He is under the hay-cock fast asleep.

[Illustration: THIS LITTLE PIG WENT TO MARKET.]

   This little pig went to market;
   This little pig stayed at home;
   This pig had a piece of bread-and-butter;
   This little pig had none;
   This little pig said, "Wee, wee, wee!
   I can't find my way home."




NURSERY RHYMES.


   Little Jack Horner sat in a corner,
     Eating his Christmas Pie;
   He put in his thumb, and pulled out a plum,
     And said, "What a good boy am I!"

[Illustration: LITTLE JACK HORNER.]

[Illustration: TO MARKET, TO MARKET.]

   To market, to market, to buy a fat pig;
   Home again, home again, jiggetty-jig.
   To market, to market, to buy a fat hog;
   Home again, home again, jiggetty-jog.

   Taffy was a Welshman,
     Taffy was a thief;
   Taffy came to my house
     And stole a piece of beef.
   I went to Taffy's house,
     Taffy was from home;
   Taffy came to my house
     And stole a marrow bone.

[Illustration: TAFFY WAS A WELSHMAN.]

[Illustration: BAA, BAA, BLACK SHEEP.]

   Baa, baa, black sheep,
     Have you any wool?
   Yes, marry, have I,
     Three bags full:
   One for my master,
     One for my dame;
   But none for the little girl
     That cries in the lane.

[Illustration: PRETTY MAID, PRETTY MAID.]

   Pretty maid, pretty maid, where have you been?
   Gathering a posie to give to the Queen.

[Illustration: MARY, MARY, QUITE CONTRARY.]

   Mary, Mary, quite contrary,
     How does your garden grow?
   Silver bells and cockle-shells,
     And columbines all of a row.

[Illustration: LITTLE BO-PEEP.]

   Little Bo-Peep has lost his sheep,
     And cannot tell where to find them
   Leave them alone, and they'll come home,
     And bring their tails behind them.

   Little Bo-Peep fell fast asleep,
     And dreamt he heard them bleating
   When he awoke, he found it a joke,
     For still they all were fleeting.

   Then up he took his little crook,
     Determined for to find them;
   He found them indeed, but it made his heart bleed,
     For they'd left their tails behind them.

[Illustration: HOT CROSS BUNS.]

           Hot Cross Buns!
           Hot Cross Buns!
   One a penny, two a penny, Hot Cross Buns.
           Hot Cross Buns!
           Hot Cross Buns!
   If you have no daughters, give them to your sons.

[Illustration: THE CAT AND FIDDLE.]

     Hey diddle diddle,
     The cat and the fiddle,
   The cow jumped over the moon,
     The little dog laughed
     To see the sport,
   While the dish ran after the spoon.

[Illustration: THE QUEEN OF HEARTS.]

   The Queen of Hearts,
   She made some tarts
     Upon a summer day;
   The Knave of Hearts,
   He stole those tarts,
     And took them quite away.

   The King of Hearts,
   He missed those tarts,
     And beat the knave full sore;
   The Knave of Hearts
   Brought back those tarts,
     And vowed he'd steal no more.

[Illustration: I HAD A LITTLE HUSBAND.]

   I had a little husband,
     No bigger than my thumb;
   I put him in a pint-pot,
     And there I bid him drum.

   I bought a little horse,
     That galloped up and down;
   I bridled him and saddled him,
     And sent him out of town.

   I gave him some garters,
     To garter up his hose,
   And a little handkerchief
     To wipe his pretty nose.

[Illustration: GOOSEY, GOOSEY, GANDER.]

   Goosey, Goosey Gander,
     Where shall I wander?
   Up stairs, down stairs,
     In my lady's chamber.

   There I met an old man
     That would not say his prayers;
   I took him by the left leg,
     And threw him down stairs.

[Illustration: LITTLE POLLY FLINDERS.]

   Little Polly Flinders,
   Sat among the cinders,
     Warming her pretty little toes;
   Her mother came and caught her,
   And scolded her little daughter,
     For spoiling her nice new clothes.

[Illustration: DING DONG BELL.]

       Ding Dong Bell,
       Pussy's in the well.
       Who put her in?
       Little Tommy Lin.
       Who pulled her out?
       Little Tommy Trout.
   What a naughty boy was that,
   To drown poor little Pussy cat,
   Who never did him any harm,
   But killed the mice in his father's barn.

[Illustration: "MULTIPLICATION IS VEXATION."]

   Multiplication is vexation;
     Division is as bad;
   The Rule of Three doth puzzle me,
     And Practice drives me mad.

[Illustration: THE DAPPLE-GREY PONY.]

   I had a little pony,
     His name was Dapple Grey,
   I lent him to a lady,
     To ride a mile away.

   She whipped him, she slashed him,
     She rode him through the mire;
   I would not lend my pony now,
     For all the lady's hire.

[Illustration: OLD WOMAN, OLD WOMAN, SAYS I.]

   Old woman, old woman, old woman say I,
   O whither, O whither, O whither so high?
   To sweep the cobwebs off the sky.
   Shall I go with you? Ay, by-and-by.

[Illustration: DAME TROT AND HER CAT.]

   Dame Trot and her cat
     Led a peaceable life
   When they were not troubled
     With other folks' strife.

   When Dame had her dinner
     Puss near her would wait,
   And was sure to receive
     A nice piece from her plate.

[Illustration: SIMPLE SIMON.]

   Simple Simon met a pieman
     Going to the fair;
   Says Simple Simon to the pieman,
     "Let me taste your ware."

   Says the pieman to Simple Simon,
     "Show me first your penny."
   Says Simple Simon to the pieman,
     "Indeed, I have not any."

   Simple Simon went a-fishing
     For to catch a whale;
   All the water he had got
     Was in his mother's pail.

[Illustration: MARY HAD A PRETTY BIRD.]

   Mary had a pretty bird,
     With feathers bright and yellow,
   Slender legs--upon my word,
     He was a pretty fellow.

   The sweetest notes he always sang,
     Which much delighted Mary;
   And near the cage she'd ever sit,
     To hear her own Canary.

[Illustration: IS JOHN SMITH WITHIN?]

   Is John Smith within?
     Yes, that he is.
   Can he set a shoe?
     Ay, marry, two;
   Here a nail and there a nail,
     Tick, tack, too.

[Illustration: GUY FAWKES.]

   Please to remember
   The fifth of November,
   Gunpowder treason and plot.
   I know no reason
   Why gunpowder treason
   Should ever be forgot.

[Illustration: JACK AND JILL.]

   Jack and Jill went up the hill
     To fetch a pail of water.
   Jack fell down and broke his crown,
     And Jill came tumbling after.

[Illustration: LITTLE FRED.]

   When little Fred went to bed,
   He always said his prayers.
   He kissed mamma and then papa,
   And straightway went upstairs.

[Illustration: LITTLE TOM TUCKER.]

   Little Tommy Tucker,
     Sings for his supper.
   What shall he eat?
     White bread and butter.
   How shall he cut it
     Without e'er a knife?
   How will he be married
     Without e'er a wife.

[Illustration: WHERE ARE YOU GOING, MY PRETTY MAID?]

   Where are you going, my pretty maid?
   I'm going a milking, sir, she said.
   May I go with you, my pretty maid?
   You're kindly welcome, sir, she said.
   What is your fortune, my pretty maid?
   My face is my fortune, sir, she said.
   Then I won't marry you, my pretty maid.
   Nobody asked you, sir, she said.

[Illustration: RIDE A COCK-HORSE.]

   Ride a cock-horse to Banbury Cross,
   To see an old lady upon a white horse;
   Rings on her fingers and bells on her toes,
   And so she makes music wherever she goes.

[Illustration: SING A SONG OF SIXPENCE.]

   Sing a song of sixpence,
     A bag full of rye;
   Four-and-twenty blackbirds
     Baked in a pie.

   When the pie was opened
     The birds began to sing.
   Was not that a dainty dish
     To set before the king?

   The king was in his countinghouse,
     Counting out his money;
   The queen was in the parlour,
     Eating bread and honey.

   The maid was in the garden,
     Hanging out the clothes;
   'Long came a blackbird
     And snapt off her nose.

[Illustration: TOM, TOM, THE PIPER'S SON.]

   Tom, Tom, the piper's son,
   Stole a pig and away he run!
   The pig was eat, and Tom was beat,
   And Tom went roaring down the street.

[Illustration: OLD KING COLE.]

     Old King Cole
     Was a merry old soul,
   And a merry old soul was he!
     He called for his pipe,
     And he called for his bowl,
   And he called for his fiddlers three.

     Every fiddler he had a fiddle,
     And a very fine fiddle had he!
   Twee tweedle dee, tweedle dee went the fiddlers.
     Oh, there's none so rare
     As can compare
   With King Cole and his fiddlers three!

[Illustration: FOUR-AND-TWENTY TAILORS WENT TO KILL A SNAIL.]

   Four-and-twenty tailors went to kill a snail;
   The best man among them durst not touch her tail.
   She put out her horns like a little Kyloe cow.
   Run, tailors, run, or she'll kill you all e'en now.

[Illustration: HUSH-A-BY BABY.]

   Hush-a-by, baby, thy cradle is green;
   Father's a nobleman; mother's a queen;
   Betty's a lady, and wears a gold ring,
   And Johnny's a drummer and drums for the king.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NATIONAL NURSERY BOOK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales of Passed Times
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Tales of Passed Times

Author: Charles Perrault

Contributor: Madame d' Aulnoy
        Jeanne-Marie Leprince de Beaumont

Illustrator: Charles Robinson

Release date: August 23, 2010 [eBook #33511]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Mark C. Orton and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES OF PASSED TIMES ***




Produced by Mark C. Orton and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









    THE TEMPLE CLASSICS
    FOR YOUNG PEOPLE




[Illustration]




    TALES _of_ PASSED TIMES

    TOLD BY
    MASTER CHARLES PERRAULT

    _WITH TWELVE ILLUSTRATIONS BY_
    CHARLES ROBINSON


    LONDON:
    J.M. DENT & COMPANY
    ALDINE HOUSE, BEDFORD STREET
    COVENT GARDEN.

    1900.




It is to Perrault that we owe our acquaintance with the greater number
of good old-fashioned fairy-tales, but an edition of these, although it
includes such intimate friends of our childhood as Blue Beard, the
Sleeping Beauty, and Little Red Riding-Hood, is hardly complete without
"Beauty and the Beast"; a version of this tale, by Mme. Le Prince de
Beaumont, has, therefore, been added to this collection. It has also
been increased, space permitting it, by the insertion of two tales by
Mme. la Comtesse d'Aulnoy; her writings, of a less robust class than
those of Perrault, possess in their atmosphere of hidden magic, the
charm which resides in that special feature of fairyland, and the
addition of "The Benevolent Frog" and "Princess Rosette" will not, we
think, be unwelcome to the youthful reader.




CONTENTS


                                                          PAGE

    THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD                          5

    LITTLE RED RIDING-HOOD                                  23

    BLUE BEARD                                              31

    MASTER CAT; OR, PUSS IN BOOTS                           43

    THE FAIRIES                                             55

    CINDERELLA; OR, THE LITTLE GLASS SLIPPER                63

    RIQUET WITH THE TUFT                                    77

    LITTLE THUMBLING                                        91

    BEAUTY AND THE BEAST                                   109

    THE BENEVOLENT FROG                                    133

    PRINCESS ROSETTE                                       169




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                          PAGE

    CINDERELLA                                  _Frontispiece_

    SHE FELL INTO A SWOON                                    9

    "GRANDMA, WHAT GREAT EARS YOU HAVE!"                    25

    "YOUR TEARS ARE USELESS," SAID BLUE BEARD;
         "YOU MUST DIE"                                     37

    PUSS AMONG THE REAPERS                                  47

    SHE GAVE IT TO THE WOMAN                                57

    THE KING'S SON GAVE HER HIS HAND                        67

    "THEN," SAID THE PRINCESS, "I WISH YOU MAY
         BE THE HANDSOMEST PRINCE IN THE WORLD"             85

    THE BOYS FOLLOWED HIM                                   93

    WHEN SHE OPENED HER EYES, SHE SAW, STANDING BESIDE
         HER, A WOMAN OF GIGANTIC SIZE CLOTHED IN A
         LION'S SKIN                                       137

    "OH, YOU ARE JESTING," SAID THE KING OF THE
    PEACOCKS                                               177




THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD


There were once a King and Queen, who were very unhappy at not having
any children, more unhappy than words can tell. Vows, pilgrimages,
everything was tried, but nothing was of any avail; at length, however,
a little daughter was born to them.

There was a splendid christening. For godmothers, they gave the young
Princess all the fairies they could find in the country--they were seven
in number--in order that each making her a gift, according to the custom
of fairies in those days, the Princess might, by these means, become
possessed of all imaginable perfections. When the ceremony was over, all
the company returned to the King's palace, where a great banquet had
been prepared for the fairies. The table was magnificently laid for
them, and each had placed for her a massive gold case, containing a
spoon, a fork, and a knife of fine gold, set with diamonds and rubies.

But as they were all taking their seats, there was seen to enter an old
fairy, who had not been invited, for everyone thought that she was
either dead or enchanted, as she had not been outside the tower in
which she lived for upwards of fifty years. The King ordered a cover to
be laid for her, but there was no possibility of giving her a massive
gold case, such as the others had, because there had been only seven
made expressly for the seven fairies. The old fairy thought she was
treated with contempt, and muttered some threats between her teeth. One
of the young fairies, who chanced to be near her, overheard her
grumblings, and was afraid she might bestow some evil gift on the young
Princess. Accordingly, as soon as they rose from table, she went and hid
herself behind the hangings, in order to be the last to speak, and so
enable herself to repair, as far as possible, any harm the old fairy
might have done. Meanwhile the fairies began bestowing their gifts on
the Princess. The youngest, as her gift, promised that she should be the
most beautiful person in the world; the next fairy, that she should have
the mind of an angel; the third, that every movement of hers should be
full of grace; the fourth, that she should dance to perfection; the
fifth, that she should sing like a nightingale; the sixth, that she
should play on every kind of instrument in the most exquisite manner
possible. It was now the turn of the old fairy, and she said, while her
head shook more with malice than with age, that the Princess should
pierce her hand with a spindle, and die of the wound.

The whole company trembled when they heard this terrible prediction, and
there was not one among them who did not shed tears. At this moment the
young fairy advanced from behind the tapestry, and said, speaking that
all might hear,--

"Comfort yourselves, King and Queen; your daughter shall not die of the
wound. It is true that I have not sufficient power to undo entirely what
my elder has done. The Princess will pierce her hand with a spindle,
but, instead of dying, she will only fall into a deep sleep, which will
last a hundred years, at the end of which time a king's son will come
and wake her."

The King, in the hope of preventing the misfortune foretold by the old
fairy, immediately sent forth a proclamation forbidding everyone, on
pain of death, either to spin with a spindle, or to have spindles in
their possession.

Fifteen or sixteen years had passed, when, the King and Queen being
absent at one of their country houses, it happened that the Princess,
while running about the castle one day, and up the stairs from one room
to the other, came to a little garret at the top of a turret, where an
old woman sat alone spinning with distaff and spindle, for this good
woman had never heard the King's proclamation forbidding the use of the
spindle.

"What are you doing there?" asked the Princess.

"I am spinning, my pretty child," answered the old woman, who did not
know who she was.

"Oh, how pretty it is!" exclaimed the Princess. "How do you do it? Give
it to me, that I may see if I can do it as well."

She had no sooner taken hold of the spindle, than, being very hasty, and
rather thoughtless, and moreover, the fairies having ordained that it
should be so, she pierced her hand with the point of it, and fainted
away. The poor old woman was in great distress, and called for help.
People came running from all quarters; they threw water in the
Princess's face, they unlaced her dress, they slapped her hands, they
rubbed her temples with Queen of Hungary's water, but nothing would
bring her to. The King, who had run upstairs at the noise, then
remembered the prediction of the fairies, and wisely concluded that this
accident must have happened as the fairies had said it would. He ordered
the Princess to be carried into a beautiful room of the palace, and laid
on a bed embroidered with silver and gold. One might have thought it was
an angel lying there, so lovely did she look, for the rich colours of
her complexion had not faded in her swoon; her cheeks were still rosy,
and her lips like coral. Only, her eyes were closed, but they could hear
her breathing softly, which showed that she was not dead.

The King gave orders that she was to be left to sleep there in quiet,
until the hour of her awaking should arrive. The good fairy who had
saved her life, by condemning her to sleep for a hundred years, was in
the Kingdom of Mataquin, twelve thousand leagues away, when the Princess
met with her accident, but she was informed of it instantly by a little
dwarf, who had a pair of seven-league boots, that is, boots which
enabled the wearer to take seven leagues at a stride.

[Illustration: "_She fell into a swoon._"

_The Sleeping Beauty_]

The fairy set out immediately, and an hour afterwards she was seen
arriving in a chariot of fire, drawn by dragons.

The King advanced to hand her out of the chariot. She approved of all he
had done, but being gifted with great foresight, she bethought her that
the Princess would feel very lost and bewildered on awaking and finding
herself all alone in the old castle; so this is what the fairy did. With
her wand she touched everybody who was in the castle, except the King
and Queen: governesses, maids of honour, women of the bed-chamber,
gentlemen, officers, stewards, cooks, scullions, boys, guards, porters,
pages, footmen; she also touched the horses that were in the stables
with their grooms, the great mastiffs in the courtyard, and little
Fluff, the pet dog of the Princess, that was on the bed beside her. As
soon as she had touched them, they all fell asleep, not to wake again
until the hour arrived for their mistress to do so, in order that they
should all be ready to attend upon her as soon as she should want them.
Even the spits before the fire, hung with partridges and pheasants, and
the very fire itself, went to sleep. All this was done in a moment, for
fairies never lost much time over their work.

The King and Queen now kissed their dear daughter, who still slept on,
quitted the castle, and issued a proclamation forbidding any person,
whosoever, to approach it. These orders were unnecessary, for in a
quarter of an hour there grew up around the park such a number of trees,
large and small, of brambles and thorns interlacing each other, that
neither man nor beast could have got through them, and nothing could be
now seen of the castle but the tops of the turrets, and they only from
a considerable distance. Nobody doubted that this also was some of the
fairy's handiwork, in order that the Princess might be protected from
the curiosity of strangers during her long slumber.

When the hundred years had passed away, the son of the King at that time
upon the throne, and who was of a different family to that of the
sleeping Princess, having been hunting in the neighbourhood, inquired
what towers they were that he saw above the trees of a very thick wood.
Each person answered him according to the story he had heard. Some said
it was an old castle, haunted by ghosts; others, that all the witches of
the country held their midnight revels there. The more general opinion,
however, was that it was the abode of an ogre, and that he carried
thither all the children he could catch, in order to eat them at his
leisure, and without being pursued, he alone having the power of making
his way through the wood.

The Prince did not know what to believe of all this, when an old peasant
spoke in his turn, and said to him, "Prince, it is more than fifty years
ago since I heard my father say, that there was in that castle the most
beautiful Princess that was ever seen; that she was to sleep for a
hundred years, and would be awakened by a king's son, for whom she was
intended and was waiting."

The young Prince, at these words, felt himself all on fire. He had not a
moment's doubt that he was the one chosen to accomplish this famous
adventure, and urged to the deed by love and glory, he resolved,
without delay, to see what would come of it.

Scarcely had he approached the wood, when all those great trees, all
those brambles and thorns, made way for him to pass of their own accord.
He walked towards the castle, which he saw at the end of a long avenue
he had entered, and he was somewhat surprised to find that none of his
people had been able to follow him, the trees having closed up again as
soon as he had passed. Nevertheless, he continued to advance; a young
prince, inspired by love, is always courageous. He came to a large
fore-court, where everything he saw might well have frozen his blood
with terror. A frightful silence reigned around; death seemed everywhere
present; on every side, nothing to be seen but the bodies of men and
animals stretched out, apparently lifeless. He soon discovered, however,
by the shining noses and red faces of the porters, that they were only
asleep; and their goblets, in which still remained a few drops of wine,
sufficiently proved that they had dozed off whilst drinking.

He next passed through a large courtyard paved with marble, ascended the
staircase, and entered the guard-room, where the guards stood, drawn up
in line, their carbines shouldered, and snoring their loudest. He
traversed several rooms with ladies and gentlemen all asleep, some
standing, others seated. At last he came to one covered with gold, and
there on a bed, the curtains of which were open on either side, he saw
the most lovely sight he had ever looked upon--a Princess, who appeared
to be about fifteen or sixteen, and whose dazzling beauty shone with a
radiance which scarcely seemed to belong to this world. He approached,
trembling and admiring, and knelt down beside her.

At that moment, the enchantment being ended, the Princess awoke, and
gazing at him for the first time with unexpected tenderness, "Is it you,
Prince?" she said; "I have waited long for you to come." The Prince,
delighted at these words, and still more by the tone in which they were
uttered, knew not how to express his joy and gratitude. He assured her
that he loved her better than himself. His words were rather confused,
but she was all the more pleased with them; there was little eloquence,
but a great deal of love. He was much more embarrassed than she was,
which is not to be wondered at. She had had time to think over what she
should say to him, for there is reason to believe, although history does
not mention it, that during her long, long sleep, the good fairy had let
her enjoy very pleasant dreams. In short, they talked for four hours
without having said half what they had to say to each other.

In the meanwhile, all the palace had been roused at the same time as the
Princess. Everybody remembered his or her duty, and, as they were not
all in love, they were dying with hunger. The lady-in-waiting, as hungry
as any of them, became impatient, and announced loudly to the Princess
that the meat was on the table. The Prince assisted the Princess to
rise; she was fully dressed, and most magnificently, but he was careful
not to tell her that she was dressed like his grandmother, and wore a
stand-up collar, for, in spite of this, she was not a whit less
beautiful.

They passed into a hall of mirrors, where they supped, waited upon by
the officers of the Princess. The violins and hautboys played old but
charming pieces of music, notwithstanding that it was a hundred years
since they had been performed by anybody, and after supper, without loss
of time, the grand almoner married the royal lovers in the chapel of the
castle.

Early next morning the Prince returned to the city, where he knew his
father would be in anxiety about him. The Prince told him that he had
lost his way in the forest whilst hunting, and that he had slept in the
hut of a woodcutter, who had given him black bread and cheese to eat.

The King, his father, who was a simple-minded man, believed him, but his
mother was not so easily satisfied. She noticed that he went hunting
nearly every day, and had always some story ready as an excuse, when he
had slept two or three nights away from home, and so she felt quite sure
that he had a lady-love. More than two years went by and the Princess
had two children, the first, which was a girl, was named Aurora, and the
second, a son, was called Day, because he was still more beautiful than
his sister.

The Queen, hoping to find out the truth from her son, often said to him
that he ought to form some attachment, but he never dared to trust her
with his secret. Although he loved her, he feared her, for she was of
the race of ogres, and the King had only married her on account of her
great riches. It was even whispered about the court that she had the
inclinations of an ogress, and that when she saw little children
passing, it was with the greatest difficulty that she restrained herself
from pouncing upon them. The Prince, therefore, would never say one word
to her about his affairs.

On the death of the King, however, which took place two years later, the
Prince, being now his own master, made a public declaration of his
marriage, and went in great state to bring the Queen, his wife, to the
palace. She made a magnificent entry into the capital, with her two
children, one on either side of her.

Sometime afterwards, the King went to war with his neighbour, the
Emperor Cantalabute. He left the Queen, his mother, Regent of the
Kingdom, earnestly recommending to her care his wife and children. He
was likely to be all summer in the field, and he had no sooner left than
the Queen-mother sent her daughter-in-law and the children to a country
house in the wood, so that she might more easily gratify her horrible
longing. She followed them thither a few days after, and one evening
said to her head cook, "I will eat little Aurora for dinner to-morrow."
"Ah, madam!" exclaimed the cook. "I will," said the Queen, and she said
it in the voice of an ogress longing to eat fresh meat; "and I will have
her served with my favourite sauce."

The poor man, seeing plainly that an ogress was not to be trifled with,
took his great knife and went up to little Aurora's room. She was then
about four years old, and came jumping and laughing to throw her arms
about his neck, and ask him for sweetmeats. He burst into tears, and
the knife fell from his hands; then he went down again and into the
farmyard, and there killed a little lamb which he served up with so
delicious a sauce, that his mistress assured him she had never eaten
anything so excellent. In the meanwhile, he had carried off little
Aurora, and given her to his wife, that she might hide her in the
lodging which she occupied at the further end of the farmyard. A week
later, the wicked Queen said to her head cook, "I will eat little Day
for supper." He made no reply, having decided in his own mind to deceive
her as before.

He went in search of little Day, and found him with a tiny foil in his
hand, fencing with a great monkey, though he was only three years old.
He carried the child to his wife, who hid him where she had hidden his
sister, and then cooked a very tender little kid in the place of little
Day, which the ogress thought wonderfully good. All had gone well enough
so far, but one evening this wicked Queen said to the head cook, "I
should like to eat the Queen with the same sauce that I had with the
children."

Then the poor cook was indeed in despair, for he did not know how he
should be able to deceive her. The young Queen was over twenty years of
age, without counting the hundred years she had slept, and no longer
such tender food, although her skin was still white and beautiful, and
where among all his animals should he find one old enough to take her
place?

He resolved at last that, to save his own life, he would kill the Queen,
and he went up to her room, determined to carry out his purpose without
delay. He worked himself up into a passion, and entered the young
Queen's room, dagger in hand. He did not wish, however, to take her by
surprise, and so he repeated to her, very respectfully, the order he had
received from the Queen-mother. "Do your duty," she said, stretching out
her neck to him; "obey the orders that have been given you. I shall
again see my children, my poor children, whom I loved so dearly," for
she had thought them dead, ever since they had been carried away from
her without a word of explanation.

"No, no, madam!" replied the poor cook, touched to the quick, "you shall
not die, and you shall see your children again, but it will be in my own
house, where I have hidden them; I will again deceive the Queen-mother
by serving up to her a young hind in your stead."

He led her forthwith to his own apartments, then, leaving her to embrace
her children and weep with them, he went and prepared a hind, which the
Queen ate at her supper with as much appetite as if it had been the
young Queen. She exulted in her cruelty, and intended to tell the King,
on his return, that some ferocious wolves had devoured the Queen, his
wife, and her two children.

One evening, while she was prowling, as usual, round the courts and
poultry-yards of the castle, to inhale the smell of fresh meat, she
overheard little Day crying in one of the lower rooms, because the
Queen, his mother, was about to whip him for being naughty, and she also
heard little Aurora begging forgiveness for her brother. The ogress
recognised the voices of the Queen and her children, and, furious at
having been deceived, she gave orders, in a voice that made everybody
tremble, that the next morning early there should be brought into the
middle of the court a large copper, which she had filled with toads,
vipers, adders, and serpents, in order to throw into it the Queen and
her children, the head cook, his wife, and his maid-servant. She further
commanded that they should be brought thither with their hands tied
behind them.

There they stood, and the executioners were preparing to fling them into
the copper, when the King, who was not expected back so soon, entered
the courtyard on horseback. He had ridden post-haste, and in great
astonishment asked what was the meaning of this horrible spectacle? No
one dared tell him, when the ogress, enraged at what she saw, flung
herself head foremost into the copper, where she was instantly devoured
by the horrid reptiles, with which she had herself caused it to be
filled. The King could not help being sorry for it; she was his mother;
but he quickly consoled himself with his beautiful wife and children.

    Some time for a husband to wait
      Who is young, handsome, wealthy and tender,
    May not be a hardship too great
      For a maid whom love happy would render.
    But to be for a century bound
      To live single, I fancy the number
    Of Beauties but small would be found
      So long who could patiently slumber.

    To lovers who hate time to waste,
      And minutes as centuries measure,
    I would hint, those who marry in haste
      May live to repent it at leisure
    Yet so ardently onwards they press,
      And on prudence so gallantly trample,
    That I haven't the heart, I confess,
      To urge on them Beauty's example.




LITTLE RED RIDING-HOOD


There was once upon a time a little village girl, the prettiest ever
seen or known, of whom her mother was dotingly fond. Her grandmother was
even fonder of her still, and had a little red hood made for the child,
which suited her so well, that wherever she went, she was known by the
name of Little Red Riding-Hood.

One day, her mother having baked some cakes, said to her, "Go and see
how your grandmother is getting on, for I have been told she is ill;
take her a cake and this little jar of butter." Whereupon Little Red
Riding-Hood started off without delay towards the village in which her
grandmother lived. On her way she had to pass through a wood, and there
she met that sly old fellow, Mr Wolf, who felt that he should very much
like to eat her up on the spot, but was afraid to do so, as there were
woodcutters at hand in the forest. He asked her which way she was going,
and the poor child, not knowing how dangerous it is to stop and listen
to a wolf, answered, "I am going to see my grandmother, and am taking a
cake and a little jar of butter, which my mother has sent her."

"Does she live far from here?" asked the Wolf.

"Oh, yes!" replied Little Red Riding-Hood, "on the further side of the
mill that you see down there; hers is the first house in the village."

"Well, I was thinking of going to visit her myself," rejoined the Wolf,
"so I will take this path, and you take the other, and we will see which
of us gets there first."

The Wolf then began running off as fast as he could along the shorter
way, which he had chosen, while the little girl went by the longer way,
and amused herself with stopping to gather nuts, or run after
butterflies, and with making little nosegays of all the flowers she
could find.

It did not take the Wolf long to reach the grandmother's house; he
knocked: tap, tap.

"Who is there?"

"It is your grand-daughter, Little Red Riding-Hood," answered the Wolf,
imitating the child's voice. "I have brought a cake and a little jar of
butter, which my mother has sent you." The good grandmother, who was ill
in bed, called out, "Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up." The
Wolf pulled the bobbin, and the door opened. He leaped on to the poor
old woman, and ate her up in less than no time, for he had been three
days without food. He then shut the door again, and laid himself down in
the grandmother's bed, to wait for Little Red Riding-Hood. Presently she
came and knocked at the door: tap, tap.

[Illustration: '_Grandma, what great ears you have!_'

_Little Red Riding-Hood_]

"Who is there?" Little Red Riding-Hood was frightened at first, on
hearing the Wolf's gruff voice, but thinking that her grandmother had a
cold, she answered,--

"It is your grand-daughter, Little Red Riding-Hood. I have brought a
cake and a little jar of butter, which my mother has sent you."

The Wolf called out, this time in rather a softer voice, "Pull the
bobbin, and the latch will go up." Little Red Riding-Hood pulled the
bobbin, and the door opened.

When the Wolf saw her come in, he hid himself under the bedclothes, and
said to her, "Put the cake and the little jar of butter in the cupboard,
and come into bed with me."

Little Red Riding-Hood undressed, and went to the bedside, and was very
much astonished to see how different her grandmother looked to what she
did when she was up and dressed.

"Grandmother," she exclaimed, "what long arms you have!"

"All the better to embrace you with, my little girl."

"Grandmother, what long legs you have!"

"All the better to run with, child."

"Grandmother, what long ears you have!"

"All the better to hear with, child."

"Grandmother, what large eyes you have!"

"All the better to see with, child."

"Grandmother, what large teeth you have!"

"All the better to eat you with!" and saying these words, the wicked
Wolf sprang out upon Little Red Riding-Hood, and ate her up.


MORAL

    Now, children, take warning, and chiefly, I pray,
      You maidens so gentle and fair,
    When you come across all kinds of folk, have a care
      Not to listen to what they may say;
    For it can't be thought strange if you do,
    Should the Wolf choose to eat up a few.
    _The_ Wolf, I say here, for you'll find
    Wolves are many, and vary in kind;
    There are some, easy-mannered and tame,
    Without malice, or temper, the same,
    Most obliging and sweet in their way,
    Like to follow their tender young prey,
    And will track them right into their homes--lack-a-day!
    Who among us has not learnt by this time to know,
    The most dangerous of wolves is the soft, smooth-tongued foe!




BLUE BEARD


Once upon a time there was a man who had fine houses in town and
country, gold and silver plate, embroidered furniture, and coaches gilt
all over; but, unfortunately, this man had a blue beard, which made him
look so ugly and terrible, that there was not a woman or girl who did
not run away from him.

One of his neighbours, a lady of rank, had two daughters, who were
perfectly beautiful. He proposed to marry one of them, leaving the
mother to choose which of the two she would give him. Neither of the
daughters, however, would have him, and they sent him from one to the
other, each being unable to make up her mind to marry a man with a blue
beard. A further reason which they had for disliking him was, that he
had already been married several times, and nobody knew what had become
of his wives. Blue Beard, in order to improve the acquaintance, took the
girls with their mother, three or four of their most intimate friends,
and some other young people who resided in the neighbourhood, to one of
his country seats, where they spent an entire week. Nothing was thought
of but excursions, hunting and fishing-parties, balls, entertainments,
suppers; nobody went to bed; the whole night was passed in games and
playing merry tricks on one another. In short, all went off so well,
that the youngest daughter began to think that the beard of the master
of the house was not so blue as it used to be, and that he was a very
worthy man. Immediately upon their return to town the marriage took
place.

At the end of a month, Blue Beard told his wife that he was obliged to
take a journey, which would keep him away from home for six weeks at
least, as he had business of great importance to attend to. He begged
her to amuse herself as well as she could during his absence, to invite
her best friends, and, if she liked, take them into the country, and
wherever she was, to have the best of everything for the table.

"Here," said he to her, "are the keys of my two large store-rooms; these
are those of the chests in which the gold and silver plate, not in
general use, is kept; these are the keys of the strong boxes in which I
keep my money; these open the caskets that contain my jewels, and this
is the master-key of all the rooms. As for this little key, it is that
of the closet at the end of the long gallery on the ground floor. Open
everything, and go everywhere except into that little closet, which I
forbid you to enter, and I forbid you so strictly, that if you should
venture to open the door, there is nothing that you may not have to
dread from my anger!" She promised to obey his orders to the letter,
and, after having embraced her, he got into his coach and set out on his
journey.

The friends and neighbours of the young bride did not wait for her
invitation, so eager were they to see all the rich treasures in the
house, and not having ventured to visit her while her husband was at
home, so frightened were they at his blue beard. They were soon to be
seen running through all the rooms, and into the closets and wardrobes,
each one more beautiful and splendid than the last. Then they went
upstairs to the store-rooms; there they could not sufficiently express
their admiration at the number and beauty of the hangings, the beds, the
sofas, the cabinets, the elegant little stands, the tables, the mirrors
in which they could see themselves from head to foot, framed some with
glass, some with silver, some with gilt metal, all of a costliness
beyond what had ever before been seen. They never ceased enlarging upon,
and envying, the good fortune of their friend, who, meanwhile, took no
pleasure in the sight of all these treasures, so great was her longing
to go and open the door of the closet on the ground floor. Her curiosity
at last reached such a pitch that, without stopping to consider how rude
it was to leave her guests, she ran down a little back staircase leading
to the closet, and in such haste that she nearly broke her neck two or
three times before she reached the bottom. At the door of the closet she
paused for a moment, calling to mind her husband's prohibition, and
reflecting that some trouble might fall upon her for her disobedience;
but the temptation was so strong that she could not resist it. So she
took the little key, and with a trembling hand opened the door of the
closet.

At first she could distinguish nothing, for the windows were closed; in
a few minutes, however, she began to see that the floor was covered with
blood, in which was reflected the bodies of several dead women hanging
on the walls. These were all the wives of Blue Beard, who had killed
them one after another. She was ready to die with fright, and the key,
which she had taken out of the lock, fell from her hand.

After recovering her senses a little, she picked up the key, locked the
door again, and went up to her room to try and compose herself; but she
found it impossible to quiet her agitation.

She now perceived that the key of the closet was stained with blood; she
wiped it two or three times, but the blood would not come off. In vain
she washed it, and even scrubbed it with sand and free-stone, the stain
was still there, for the key was an enchanted one, and there were no
means of cleaning it completely; when the blood was washed off one side,
it came back on the other.

Blue Beard returned that very evening, and said that he had received
letters on the road, telling him that the business on which he was going
had been settled to his advantage.

His wife did all she could to make him believe that she was delighted at
his speedy return.

The next morning he asked her for his keys again; she gave them to him;
but her hand trembled so, that he had not much difficulty in guessing
what had happened.

"How comes it," said he, "that the key of the closet is not with the
others?"

"I must have left it," she replied, "upstairs on my table."

"Fail not," said Blue Beard, "to give it me presently."

After several excuses, she was obliged to go and fetch the key. Blue
Beard having examined it, said to his wife, "Why is there blood on this
key?" "I don't know," answered the poor wife, paler than death.

"You don't know!" rejoined Blue Beard; "I know well enough. You must
needs go into the closet. Well, madam, you shall go in again, and take
your place among the ladies you saw there."

She flung herself at her husband's feet, weeping and begging his pardon,
with all the signs of a true repentance at having disobeyed him. Her
beauty and sorrow might have melted a rock, but Blue Beard had a heart
harder than rock.

"You must die, madam," said he, "and at once."

"If I must die," she replied, looking at him with streaming eyes, "give
me a little time to say my prayers."

"I give you half a quarter of an hour," answered Blue Beard, "not a
minute more."

As soon as she found herself alone, she called her sister, and said to
her, "Sister Anne"--for so she was named--"go up, I pray you, to the top
of the tower, and see if my brothers are not in sight. They promised
they would come to visit me to-day, and if you see them, sign to them to
make haste."

Sister Anne mounted to the top of the tower, and the poor unhappy wife
called to her from time to time, "Anne! Sister Anne! do you not see
anything coming?" and Sister Anne answered her, "I see nothing but the
dust turning gold in the sun, and the grass growing green."

Meanwhile, Blue Beard, with a large cutlass in his hand, called out with
all his might to his wife, "Come down quickly, or I shall come up
there." "One minute more, if you please," replied his wife; and then
said quickly in a low voice, "Anne! Sister Anne! do you not see anything
coming?" And Sister Anne answered, "I see nothing but the dust turning
gold in the sun, and the grass growing green."

"Come down quickly," roared Blue Beard, "or I shall come up there."

"I am coming," answered his wife; and then called "Anne! Sister Anne! do
you not see anything coming?"

"I see a great cloud of dust moving this way," said Sister Anne.

"Is it my brothers?"

"Alas! no, sister, only a flock of sheep."

"Will you not come down?" shouted Blue Beard.

"One minute more," replied his wife; and then she cried, "Anne! Sister
Anne! do you not see anything coming?"

"I see two horsemen coming this way," she replied, "but they are still a
great distance off. Heaven be praised!" she exclaimed a moment
afterwards. "They are my brothers! I am making all the signs I can to
hasten them."

[Illustration: _"Your tears are useless" said Bluebeard, "you must
die!"_ _Bluebeard._]

Blue Beard began to roar so loudly that the whole house shook again. The
poor wife went down and threw herself at his feet with weeping eyes and
dishevelled hair. "It is of no use," said Blue Beard; "you must die!"
Then, taking her by the hair with one hand, and raising the cutlass with
the other, he was about to cut off her head.

The poor wife, turning towards him her dying eyes, begged him to give
her one short moment to collect herself. "No, no," said he; "commend
yourself to heaven," and, lifting his arm.... At this moment there was
such a loud knocking at the gate that Blue Beard stopped short. It was
opened, and two horsemen were immediately seen to enter, who, drawing
their swords, ran straight at Blue Beard. He recognised them as the
brothers of his wife, one a dragoon, the other a musketeer, and he
therefore fled at once, hoping to escape; but they pursued him so
closely that they overtook him before he could reach the steps to his
door, and, running their swords through his body, left him dead on the
spot. The poor wife was almost as dead as her husband, and had not
strength to rise and embrace her brothers.

It was found that Blue Beard had left no heirs, and so his widow came
into possession of all his property. She employed part of it in marrying
her Sister Anne to a man who had long loved her; another part in buying
captains' commissions for her two brothers; and with the remainder she
married herself to a very worthy man, who made her forget the dreadful
time she had passed with Blue Beard.

    Provided one has common sense,
    And of the world but knows the ways,
    This story bears the evidence
    Of being one of bygone days.
    No husband now is so terrific,
    Impossibilities expecting:
    Though jealous, he is still pacific,
    Indifference to his wife affecting.
    And of his beard, whate'er the hue,
    His spouse need fear no such disaster;
    Indeed, 'twould often puzzle you
    To say which of the twain is master.




MASTER CAT; OR, PUSS IN BOOTS


A miller bequeathed to his three sons all he possessed of worldly goods,
which consisted only of his Mill, his Ass, and his Cat. It did not take
long to divide the property, and neither notary nor attorney was called
in; they would soon have eaten up the poor little patrimony. The eldest
son had the Mill; the second son, the Ass; and the youngest had nothing
but the Cat.

The latter was very disconsolate at having such a poor share of the
inheritance. "My brothers," said he, "may be able to earn an honest
livelihood by entering into partnership; but, as for me, when I have
eaten my Cat and made a muff of his skin, I must die of hunger." The
Cat, who had heard this speech, although he had not appeared to do so,
said to him with a sedate and serious air, "Do not be troubled, master;
you have only to give me a bag, and get a pair of boots made for me in
which I can go among the bushes, and you will see that you are not left
so badly off as you believe." Though his master did not place much
reliance on the Cat's words, he had seen him play such cunning tricks in
catching rats and mice, when he would hang himself up by the heels, or
hide in the flour pretending to be dead, that he was not altogether
without hope of being helped by him out of his distress.

As soon as the Cat had what he asked for, he boldly pulled on his boots,
and, hanging his bag round his neck, he took the strings of it in his
fore-paws, and started off for a warren where there were a great number
of rabbits. He put some bran and sow-thistles in his bag, and then,
stretching himself out as if he were dead, he waited till some young
rabbit, little versed in the wiles of the world, should come and poke
his way into the bag, in order to eat what was inside it.

He had hardly laid himself down before he had the pleasure of seeing a
young scatterbrain of a rabbit get into the bag, whereupon Master Cat
pulled the strings, caught it, and killed it without mercy. Proud of his
prey, he went to the palace, and asked to speak to the King. He was
ushered upstairs and into the state apartment, and, after making a low
bow to the King, he said, "Sire, here is a wild rabbit, which my Lord
the Marquis of Carabas--for such was the title he had taken a fancy to
give to his master--has ordered me to present, with his duty, to your
Majesty."

"Tell your master," replied the King, "that I thank him and am pleased
with his gift."

Another day he went and hid himself in the wheat, keeping the mouth of
his bag open as before, and as soon as he saw that a brace of partridges
had run inside, he pulled the strings, and so took them both. He went
immediately and presented them to the King, as he had the rabbits. The
King was equally grateful at receiving the brace of partridges, and
ordered drink to be given him.

For the next two or three months, the Cat continued in this manner,
taking presents of game at intervals to the King, as if from his master.
One day, when he knew the King was going to drive on the banks of the
river, with his daughter, the most beautiful Princess in the world, he
said to his master, "If you will follow my advice, your fortune is made;
you have only to go and bathe in a part of the river I will point out to
you, and then leave the rest to me."

The Marquis of Carabas did as his Cat advised him, without knowing what
good would come of it. While he was bathing, the King passed by, and the
Cat began to call out with all his might, "Help! Help! My Lord the
Marquis of Carabas is drowning!" Hearing the cry, the King looked out of
the coach window, and recognising the Cat who had so often brought him
game, he ordered his guards to fly to the help of my Lord the Marquis of
Carabas. Whilst they were getting the poor Marquis out of the river, the
Cat went up to the royal coach, and told the King that, while his master
had been bathing, some robbers had come and carried off his clothes,
although he had shouted, "Stop thief," as loud as he could. The rogue
had hidden them himself under a large stone. The King immediately
ordered the officers of his wardrobe to go and fetch one of his
handsomest suits for my Lord the Marquis of Carabas. The King embraced
him a thousand times, and as the fine clothes they dressed him in set
off his good looks--for he was handsome and well made--the Marquis of
Carabas quite took the fancy of the King's daughter, and after he had
cast two or three respectful and rather tender glances towards her, she
fell very much in love with him. The King insisted upon his getting into
the coach, and accompanying them in their drive. The Cat, delighted to
see that his plans were beginning to succeed, ran on before, and coming
across some peasants who were mowing a meadow, he said to them, "You,
good people, who are mowing here, if you do not tell the King that this
meadow you are mowing belongs to my Lord the Marquis of Carabas, you
shall all be cut in pieces as small as minced meat." The King did not
fail to ask the peasants whose meadow it was they were mowing. "It
belongs to my Lord the Marquis of Carabas," said they all together, for
the Cat's threat had frightened them. "You have a fine property there,"
said the King to the Marquis of Carabas.

"As you say, sire," responded the Marquis of Carabas, "for it is a
meadow which yields an abundant crop every year."

Master Cat, who still kept in advance of the party, came up to some
reapers, and said to them, "You, good people, who are reaping, if you do
not say that all this corn belongs to my Lord the Marquis of Carabas,
you shall all be cut into pieces as small as minced meat."

[Illustration: _Puss among the reapers._]

The King, who passed by a minute afterwards, wished to know to whom
belonged all the cornfields he saw. "To my Lord the Marquis of Carabas,"
repeated the reapers, and the King again congratulated the Marquis on
his property.

The Cat, still continuing to run before the coach, uttered the same
threat to everyone he met, and the King was astonished at the great
wealth of my Lord the Marquis of Carabas. Master Cat at length arrived
at a fine castle, the owner of which was an ogre, the richest ogre ever
known, for all the lands through which the King had driven belonged to
the Lord of this castle. The Cat took care to find out who the ogre was,
and what he was able to do; then he asked to speak with him, saying that
he did not like to pass so near his castle without doing himself the
honour of paying his respects to him. The ogre received him as civilly
as an ogre can, and made him sit down.

"I have been told," said the Cat, "that you have the power of changing
yourself into all kinds of animals; that you could, for instance,
transform yourself into a lion or an elephant."

"'Tis true," said the ogre, abruptly, "and to prove it to you, you shall
see me become a lion." The Cat was so frightened when he saw a lion in
front of him, that he quickly scrambled up into the gutter, not without
difficulty and danger, on account of his boots, which were worse than
useless for walking on the tiles. Shortly afterwards, seeing that the
ogre had resumed his natural form, the Cat climbed down again, and
admitted that he had been terribly frightened. "I have also been
assured," said the Cat, "but I cannot believe it, that you have the
power besides of taking the form of the smallest animal; for instance,
that of a rat, or a mouse; I confess to you I hold this to be utterly
impossible." "Impossible!" exclaimed the ogre, "you shall see!" and he
immediately changed himself into a mouse, and began running about the
floor. The cat no sooner caught sight of it, than he pounced upon it and
ate it.

In the meanwhile, the King, seeing the fine castle of the ogre as he was
driving past, thought he should like to go inside. The Cat, who heard
the noise of the coach rolling over the draw-bridge, ran to meet it, and
said to the King, "Your Majesty is welcome to the Castle of my Lord the
Marquis of Carabas!"

"How, my Lord Marquis," exclaimed the King, "this castle belongs to you?
Nothing could be finer than this courtyard, and all these buildings
which surround it. Let us see the inside of it, if you please."

The Marquis handed out the young Princess, and following the King, who
led the way upstairs, they entered a grand hall, where they found
prepared a magnificent repast, which the ogre had ordered in expectation
of some friends, who were to have visited him that very day, but who did
not venture to enter when they heard the King was there. The King, as
greatly delighted with the excellent qualities of my Lord the Marquis of
Carabas as his daughter, who was more than ever in love with him, seeing
what great wealth he possessed, said to him, after having drunk five or
six bumpers, "It depends entirely on yourself, my Lord Marquis, whether
or not you become my son-in-law." The Marquis, making several profound
bows, accepted the honour the King offered him, and that same day was
married to the Princess. The Cat became a great lord, and never again
ran after mice, except for his amusement.

    Be the advantage never so great
    Of owning a superb estate,
      From sire to son descended,
    Young men oft find, on industry,
    Combined with ingenuity,
      They'd better have depended.

       *       *       *       *       *

    If the son of a miller so quickly could gain
    The heart of a Princess, it seems pretty plain,
    With good looks and good manners, and some aid from dress,
    The humblest need not quite despair of success.




THE FAIRIES


There was once a widow who had two daughters. The elder was so like her
mother in temper and face, that to have seen the one was to have seen
the other. They were both so disagreeable and proud, that it was
impossible to live with them. The younger, who was the exact portrait of
her father in her kindly and polite ways, was also as beautiful a girl
as one could see. As we are naturally fond of those who resemble us, the
mother doted on her elder daughter, while for the younger she had a most
violent aversion, and made her take her meals in the kitchen and work
hard all day. Among other things that she was obliged to do, this poor
child was forced to go twice a day to fetch water from a place a mile or
more from the house, and carry back a large jug filled to the brim. As
she was standing one day by this spring, a poor woman came up to her,
and asked the girl to give her some water to drink.

"Certainly, my good woman," she replied, and the beautiful girl at once
stooped and rinsed out the jug, and then, filling it with water from the
clearest part of the spring, she held it up to the woman, continuing to
support the jug, that she might drink with greater comfort. Having
drunk, the woman said to her, "You are so beautiful, so good and kind,
that I cannot refrain from conferring a gift upon you," for she was
really a fairy, who had taken the form of a poor village woman, in order
to see how far the girl's kind-heartedness would go. "This gift I make
you," continued the fairy, "that with every word you speak, either a
flower or a precious stone will fall from your mouth."

The girl had no sooner reached home than her mother began scolding her
for being back so late. "I am sorry, mother," said she, "to have been
out so long," and as she spoke, there fell from her mouth two roses, two
pearls, and two large diamonds. The mother gazed at her in astonishment.
"What do I see!" she exclaimed, "Pearls and diamonds seem to be dropping
from her mouth! How is this, my daughter?"--it was the first time she
had called her _daughter_. The poor child related in all simplicity what
had happened, letting fall quantities of diamonds in the course of her
narrative. "I must certainly send my other daughter there," said the
mother. "Look, Fanchon, see what falls from your sister's mouth when she
speaks! Would you not be glad to receive a similar gift? All you have to
do, is to go and fetch water from the spring, and if an old woman asks
you for some to drink, to give it her nicely and politely." "I should
like to see myself going to the spring," answered the rude, cross girl.

"I insist on your going," rejoined the mother, "and that at once."

[Illustration: '_She gave it to the Woman._']

The elder girl went off, still grumbling; with her she took the
handsomest silver bottle she could find in the house.

She had no sooner arrived at the spring, than she saw a lady
magnificently dressed walking towards her from the wood, who approached
and asked for some water to drink. It was the same fairy who had
appeared to the sister, but she had now put on the airs and apparel of a
princess, as she wished to see how far this girl's rudeness would go.
"Do you think I came here just to draw water for you?" answered the
arrogant and unmannerly girl; "I have, of course, brought this silver
bottle on purpose for madam to drink from! Well, all I have to say
is--drink from it if you like."

"You are scarcely polite," said the fairy, without losing her temper;
"however, as you are so disobliging, I confer this gift upon you, that
with every word you speak, a snake or a toad shall fall from your
mouth."

Directly her mother caught sight of her, she called out, "Well, my
daughter!" "Well, my mother!" replied the ill-tempered girl, throwing
out as she spoke two vipers and two toads. "Alack!" cried the mother,
"what do I see? This is her sister's doing, but I will pay her out for
it," and, so saying, she ran towards the younger girl with intent to
beat her. The unhappy girl fled from the house, and went and hid herself
in a neighbouring forest. The King's son, who was returning from
hunting, met her, and seeing how beautiful she was, asked her what she
was doing there all alone, and why she was crying. "Alas! sir, my
mother has driven me from home." The King's son, seeing five or six
pearls and as many diamonds, falling from her mouth as she spoke, asked
her to explain how this was, and she told him all her tale. The King's
son fell in love with her, and thinking that such a gift as she
possessed was worth more than any ordinary dower brought by another, he
carried her off to his father's palace, and there married her.

As for her sister, she made herself so hated, that her own mother drove
her from the house. The miserable girl, having gone about in vain trying
to find someone who would take her in, crept away into the corner of a
wood, and there died.

    Of higher worth are gentle words
      Than diamonds or gold,
    And even o'er the minds of men
      A great power they hold.

       *       *       *       *       *

    It costs some pains to be polite,
      And needs some kindly thought,
    But soon or late, as here you see,
      Reward will come unsought.




CINDERELLA; OR, THE LITTLE GLASS SLIPPER


Once upon a time there was a nobleman, who took for a second wife the
haughtiest and proudest woman that had ever been seen. She had two
daughters of the same temper, and who resembled her in everything. The
husband, on his side, had a daughter, of unexampled gentleness and
goodness. She inherited these qualities from her mother, who had been
the best creature in the world.

The wedding was hardly over before the stepmother's ill-humour broke
out. She could not endure the young girl, whose good qualities made her
own daughters appear still more detestable. She put her to do all the
most menial work in the house. It was she who washed up the plates and
dishes, and cleaned the stairs; who scrubbed the stepmother's room, and
those of her daughters. She slept in a garret at the top of the house,
on a wretched straw mattress, while her sisters occupied rooms with
inlaid floors, and had the latest fashioned beds, and mirrors in which
they could see themselves from head to foot. The poor girl bore
everything with patience, and did not dare complain to her father, who
would only have scolded her, as he was entirely governed by his wife.
When she had done her work, she was in the habit of going into the
chimney-corner and sitting down amongst the cinders, which caused her to
be nicknamed Cindertail by the household in general. The second
daughter, however, who was not quite so rude as her sister, called her
Cinderella. Nevertheless, Cinderella in her shabby clothes, still looked
a thousand times more beautiful than her sisters, although so
magnificently dressed.

It happened that the King's son gave a ball, to which he invited
everyone of position. Our two fine ladies were among those who received
an invitation, for they made a great show in the neighbourhood. They
were now in great delight, and very busy choosing the most becoming
gowns and head-dresses. A new mortification for poor Cinderella, for it
was she who had to iron her sisters' fine linen, and goffer their
ruffles. No one talked of anything but of the style in which they were
to be dressed. "I," said the eldest, "will wear my red velvet dress, and
my English point-lace trimmings." "I," said the youngest, "shall only
wear my usual petticoat; but, to make up for that, I shall put on my
gold-flowered cloak, and my clasp of diamonds, which are none of the
least valuable." They sent for a first-rate milliner, that their caps
might be made to fashion, and they bought their patches from the best
maker. They called Cinderella to give them her opinion, for her taste
was excellent. Cinderella gave them the best advice in the world, and
even offered to dress their hair for them, which they were very willing
she should do.

Whilst she was busy with the hairdressing, they said to her,
"Cinderella, should you be very glad to go to the ball?"

"Alas! you only make fun of me; such a thing would not be suitable for
me at all."

"You are right; they would indeed laugh to see a Cindertail at the
ball!"

Any other than Cinderella would have dressed their hair awry, but she
had a good disposition, and arranged it for both of them to perfection.
They could eat nothing for nearly two days, so transported were they
with joy. More than a dozen laces were broken in making their waists as
small as possible, and they were continually before their
looking-glasses. At last the happy day arrived. They set off, and
Cinderella followed them with her eyes as long as she could. When they
were out of sight she began to cry. Her godmother, who saw her all in
tears, asked her what was the matter. "I should so like--I should so
like--" she sobbed so violently that she could not finish the sentence.
"You would so like to go to the ball, is not that it?"

"Alas! yes," said Cinderella, sighing.

"Well, if you will be a good girl, I will undertake that you shall go."
She took her into her room, and said to her, "Go into the garden and
bring me a pumpkin." Cinderella went at once, gathered the finest she
could find, and brought it to her godmother, wondering the while how a
pumpkin could enable her to go to the ball. Her godmother scooped it
out, and, having left nothing but the rind, struck it with her wand,
and the pumpkin was immediately changed into a beautiful coach, gilt all
over. She then went and looked into the mouse-trap, where she found six
mice, all alive. She told Cinderella to lift the door of the mouse-trap
a little, and to each mouse, as it ran out, she gave a tap with her
wand, and the mouse was immediately changed into a fine horse, so that
at last there stood ready a handsome train of six horses, of a beautiful
dappled mouse-grey colour. As she was in some difficulty as to what she
could take to turn into a coachman, Cinderella said, "I will go and see
if there is not a rat in the rat-trap; we will make a coachman of him."

"You are right," said her godmother, "go and see."

Cinderella brought her the rat-trap, in which there were three large
rats. The fairy chose one from the three on account of its ample beard,
and having touched it, it was changed into a fat coachman, with the
finest whiskers that ever were seen. She then said, "Go into the garden,
and there, behind the watering-pot, you will find six lizards, bring
them to me." Cinderella had no sooner brought them than the godmother
changed them into six footmen, with their liveries all covered with
lace, who immediately jumped up behind the coach, and hung on to it as
if they had done nothing else all their lives. The fairy then said to
Cinderella, "Well, there is something in which to go to the ball; are
you not well pleased?"

[Illustration: '_The King's son gave her his hand._' _Cinderella._]

"Yes, but am I to go in these dirty old clothes?" Her godmother touched
her lightly with her wand, and in the same instant her dress was changed
into one of gold and silver, covered with precious stones. She then gave
her a pair of glass slippers, the prettiest in the world. When she was
thus attired, she got into the coach; but her godmother told her, above
all things, not to stay past midnight--warning her, that if she remained
at the ball a minute longer, her coach would again become a pumpkin, her
horses, mice, her footmen, lizards, and her clothes turn again into her
old ones. She promised her godmother that she would not fail to leave
the ball before midnight, and drove off, almost out of her mind with
joy.

The King's son, who was informed that a grand Princess had arrived whom
nobody knew, ran to receive her. He handed her out of the coach and led
her into the hall, where the guests were assembled. There was
immediately a dead silence; the dancing stopped, and the fiddlers ceased
to play, so engaged did everyone become in gazing upon the wonderful
beauty of the unknown lady. Nothing was heard but a general murmur of
"Oh! how lovely she is!" The King himself, old as he was, could not take
his eyes from her, and observed to the Queen, that it was a long time
since he had seen so lovely and amiable a person. All the ladies were
intently occupied in examining her head-dress and her clothes, that they
might order some like them the very next day, provided that they might
be able to find materials as costly, and work-people sufficiently clever
to make them up.

The King's son conducted her to the most honourable seat, and then led
her out to dance. She danced so gracefully that everybody's admiration
of her was increased. A very grand supper was served, of which the
Prince ate not a morsel, so absorbed was he in the contemplation of her
beauty. She seated herself beside her sisters, and showed them a
thousand civilities. She shared with them the oranges and citrons which
the Prince had given her, at which they were greatly surprised, for she
appeared a perfect stranger to them. While they were thus talking
together, Cinderella heard the clock strike the three quarters past
eleven; she at once made a profound curtsey to the company, and left as
quickly as she could. As soon as she had reached home, she went to find
her godmother, and after having thanked her, said she much wished to go
to the ball again next day, because the King's son had invited her. She
was telling her godmother all that had passed at the ball, when the two
sisters knocked at the door. Cinderella went and opened it. "How late
you are!" said she to them, yawning, rubbing her eyes, and then
stretching herself as if she had but just awoke, although she had had no
inclination to sleep since she parted from them. "If you had been at the
ball," said one of her sisters to her, "you would not have been weary of
it. There came to it the most beautiful princess--the most beautiful
that ever was seen; she paid us many attentions, and gave us oranges and
citrons." Cinderella was beside herself with delight. She asked them the
name of the Princess, but they replied that nobody knew her, that the
King's son was much puzzled about it, and that he would give everything
in the world to know who she was. Cinderella smiled, and said, "She was
very lovely, then? How fortunate you are! Could not I get a sight of
her? Alas! Miss Javotte, lend me the yellow gown you wear every day."

"Truly," said Miss Javotte, "I like that! Lend one's gown to a dirty
Cindertail like you! I should be mad indeed!" Cinderella fully expected
this refusal, and was rejoiced at it, for she would not have known what
to do if her sister had lent her the gown.

The next day the sisters went again to the ball, and Cinderella also,
but still more splendidly dressed than before. The King's son never left
her side, or ceased saying tender things to her. Cinderella found the
evening pass very pleasantly, and forgot her godmother's warning, so
that she heard the clock begin to strike twelve while still thinking
that it was not yet eleven. She rose and fled as lightly as a fawn. The
Prince followed her, but could not overtake her. She dropped one of her
glass slippers, which the Prince carefully picked up. Cinderella reached
home almost breathless, without coach or footmen, and in her shabby
clothes, with nothing remaining of her finery but one of her little
slippers, the fellow of that which she had dropped. The guards at the
palace gate were asked if they had not seen a Princess pass out; they
answered that they had seen no one pass but a poorly-dressed girl, who
had more the appearance of a peasant than of a lady. When the two
sisters returned from the ball, Cinderella asked them if they had been
as much entertained as before, and if the beautiful lady had been
present. They said yes, but that she had fled as soon as it had struck
twelve, and in such haste, that she had dropped one of her little glass
slippers, the prettiest in the world; that the King's son had picked it
up, and had done nothing but gaze upon it during the remainder of the
evening; and that, undoubtedly, he was very much in love with the
beautiful person to whom the little slipper belonged. They spoke the
truth; for a few days afterwards the King's son caused it to be
proclaimed by sound of trumpet that he would marry her whose foot would
exactly fit the slipper. They began by trying it on the princesses, then
on the duchesses, and so on throughout the Court; but in vain. It was
taken to the two sisters, who did their utmost to force one of their
feet into the slipper, but they could not manage to do so. Cinderella,
who was looking on, and who recognised the slipper, said laughingly,
"Let me see if it will not fit me." Her sisters began to laugh and
ridicule her. The gentleman of the Court who had been entrusted to try
the slipper, having looked attentively at Cinderella, and seeing that
she was very beautiful, said that it was only fair that her request
should be granted, as he had received orders to try the slipper on all
maidens, without exception. He made Cinderella sit down, and putting the
slipper to her little foot, he saw it slip on easily and fit like wax.
Great was the astonishment of the two sisters, but it was still greater
when Cinderella took the other little slipper out of her pocket and put
it on her other foot. At that moment the godmother appeared, who giving
a tap with her wand to Cinderella's clothes, they became still more
magnificent than those she had worn before.

The two sisters then recognised in her the beautiful person they had
seen at the ball. They threw themselves at her feet to beg for
forgiveness for all the ill-treatment she had suffered from them.
Cinderella raised and embraced them, said that she forgave them with all
her heart, and begged them to love her dearly for the future. She was
conducted, dressed as she was, to the young Prince. He found her more
charming than ever, and a few days afterwards he married her.
Cinderella, who was as kind as she was beautiful, gave her sisters
apartments in the palace, and married them the very same day to two
great lords of the Court.

    Beauty in woman is a treasure rare
      Which we are never weary of admiring;
    But a sweet temper is a gift more fair
      And better worth the youthful maid's desiring.
    That was the boon bestowed on Cinderella
      By her wise godmother--her truest glory.
    The rest was "nought but leather and prunella."
      Such is the moral of this little story--
    Beauties, that charm, become you more than dress,
      And win a heart with far greater facility.
    In short, in all things to ensure success,
            The real Fairy Gift is amiability!

       *       *       *       *       *

    Talent, courage, wit, and worth,
    Are rare gifts to own on earth;
    But if you want to thrive at Court--
    So, at least, the wise report--
    You will find you need some others,
    Such as godfathers or mothers.




RIQUET WITH THE TUFT


Once upon a time there was a Queen who had a son, so ugly and misshapen,
that it was doubted for a long time whether his form was really human. A
fairy, who was present at his birth, affirmed, nevertheless, that he
would be worthy to be loved, as he would have an excellent wit; she
added, moreover, that by virtue of the gift she had bestowed upon him,
he would be able to impart equal intelligence to the one whom he loved
best. All this was some consolation to the poor Queen, who was much
distressed at having brought so ugly a little monkey into the world. It
is true that the child was no sooner able to speak than he said a
thousand pretty things, and that in all his ways there was a certain air
of intelligence, with which everyone was charmed. I had forgotten to say
that he was born with a little tuft of hair on his head, and so he came
to be called Riquet with the Tuft; for Riquet was the family name.

About seven or eight years later, the Queen of a neighbouring kingdom
had two daughters. The elder was fairer than the day, and the Queen was
so delighted, that it was feared some harm might come to her from her
great joy. The same fairy who had assisted at the birth of little
Riquet, was present upon this occasion, and in order to moderate the joy
of the Queen, she told her that this little Princess would have no gifts
of mind at all, and that she would be as stupid as she was beautiful.
The Queen was greatly mortified on hearing this, but, shortly after, she
was even more annoyed, when her second little daughter was born and
proved to be extremely ugly. "Do not distress yourself, madam," said the
fairy to her, "your daughter will find compensation, for she will have
so much intelligence, that her lack of beauty will scarcely be
perceived."

"Heaven send it may be so," replied the Queen; "but are there no means
whereby a little more understanding might be given to the elder, who is
so lovely?" "I can do nothing for her in the way of intelligence,
madam," said the fairy, "but everything in the way of beauty; as,
however, there is nothing in my power I would not do to give you
comfort, I will bestow on her the power of conferring beauty on any man
or woman who shall please her." As these two Princesses grew up, their
endowments also became more perfect, and nothing was talked of anywhere
but the beauty of the elder, and the intelligence of the younger. It is
true that their defects also greatly increased with their years. The
younger became uglier every moment, and the elder more stupid every day.
She either made no answer when she was spoken to, or else said something
foolish. With this she was so clumsy, that she could not even place four
pieces of china on a mantelshelf, without breaking one of them, or
drink a glass of water, without spilling half of it on her dress.
Notwithstanding the attraction of beauty, the younger, in whatever
society they might be, nearly always bore away the palm from her sister.
At first everyone went up to the more beautiful, to gaze at and admire
her; but they soon left her for the cleverer one, to listen to her many
pleasant and amusing sayings; and people were astonished to find that in
less than a quarter of an hour, the elder had not a soul near her, while
all the company had gathered round the younger. The elder, though very
stupid, noticed this, and would have given, without regret, all her
beauty, for half the sense of her sister. Discreet as she was, the Queen
could not help often reproaching her with her stupidity, which made the
poor Princess ready to die of grief.

One day, when she had gone by herself into a wood, to weep over her
misfortune, she saw approaching her, a little man of very ugly and
unpleasant appearance, but magnificently dressed. It was the young
Prince Riquet with the Tuft, who, having fallen in love with her from
seeing her portraits, which were sent all over the world, had left his
father's kingdom that he might have the pleasure of beholding her and
speaking to her. Enchanted at meeting her thus alone, he addressed her
with all the respect and politeness imaginable. Having remarked, after
paying her the usual compliments, that she was very melancholy, he said
to her, "I cannot understand, madam, how a person so beautiful as you
are can be so unhappy as you appear; for, although I can boast of having
seen an infinite number of beautiful people, I can say with truth that
I have never seen one whose beauty could be compared with yours."

"You are pleased to say so, sir," replied the Princess, and there she
stopped.

"Beauty," continued Riquet, "is so great an advantage, that it ought to
take the place of every other, and, possessed of it, I see nothing that
can have power to afflict one."

"I would rather," said the Princess, "be as ugly as you are, and have
intelligence, than possess the beauty I do, and be so stupid as I am."

"There is no greater proof of intelligence, madam, than the belief that
we have it not; it is the nature of that gift, that the more we have,
the more we believe ourselves to be without it."

"I do not know how that may be," said the Princess, "but I know well
enough that I am very stupid, and that is the cause of the grief that is
killing me."

"If that is all that troubles you, madam, I can easily put an end to
your sorrow."

"And how would you do that?" said the Princess.

"I have the power, madam," said Riquet with the Tuft, "to give as much
intelligence as it is possible to possess, to the person whom I love
best; as you, madam, are that person, it will depend entirely upon
yourself, whether or not you become gifted with this amount of
intelligence, provided that you are willing to marry me."

The Princess was struck dumb with astonishment, and replied not a word.

"I see," said Riquet with the Tuft, "that this proposal troubles you,
and I am not surprised, but I will give you a full year to consider it."

The Princess had so little sense, and at the same time was so anxious to
have a great deal, that she thought the end of that year would never
come; so she at once accepted the offer that was made her. She had no
sooner promised Riquet with the Tuft that she would marry him that day
twelve months, than she felt herself quite another person to what she
had previously been. She found she was able to say whatever she pleased,
with a readiness past belief, and of saying it in a clever, but easy and
natural manner. She immediately began a sprightly and well-sustained
conversation with Riquet with the Tuft, and was so brilliant in her
talk, that Riquet with the Tuft began to think he had given her more wit
than he had reserved for himself. On her return to the palace, the whole
Court was puzzled to account for a change so sudden and extraordinary;
for the number of foolish things which they had been accustomed to hear
from her, she now made as many sensible and exceedingly witty remarks.
All the Court was in a state of joy not to be described. The younger
sister alone was not altogether pleased, for, having lost her
superiority over her sister in the way of intelligence, she now only
appeared by her side as a very unpleasing-looking person.

The King now began to be guided by his elder daughter's advice, and at
times even held his Council in her apartments. The news of the change of
affairs was spread abroad, and all the young princes of the
neighbouring kingdoms exerted themselves to gain her affection, and
nearly all of them asked her hand in marriage. She found none of them,
however, intelligent enough to please her, and she listened to all of
them, without engaging herself to one.

At length arrived a Prince, so rich and powerful, so clever and so
handsome, that she could not help listening willingly to his addresses.
Her father, having perceived this, told her that he left her at perfect
liberty to choose a husband for herself, and that she had only to make
known her decision. As the more intelligence we possess, the more
difficulty we find in making up our mind on such a matter as this, she
begged her father, after having thanked him, to allow her time to think
about it.

She went, by chance, to walk in the same wood in which she had met
Riquet with the Tuft, in order to meditate more uninterruptedly over
what she had to do. While she was walking, deep in thought, she heard a
dull sound beneath her feet, as of many persons running to and fro, and
busily occupied. Having listened more attentively, she heard one say,
"Bring me that saucepan;" another, "Give me that kettle;" another, "Put
some wood on the fire." At the same moment the ground opened, and she
saw beneath her what appeared to be a large kitchen, full of cooks,
scullions, and all sorts of servants necessary for the preparation of a
magnificent banquet. There came forth a band of about twenty to thirty
cooks, who went and established themselves in an avenue of the wood, at
a very long table, and who, each with the larding-pin in his hand and
the tail of his fur cap over his ear, set to work, keeping time to a
harmonious song.

The Princess, astonished at this sight, asked the men for whom they were
working.

"Madam," replied the chief among them, "for Prince Riquet with the Tuft,
whose marriage will take place to-morrow." The Princess, still more
surprised than she was before, and suddenly recollecting that it was
just a twelvemonth from the day on which she had promised to marry
Prince Riquet with the Tuft, was overcome with trouble and amazement.
The reason of her not having remembered her promise was, that when she
made it she had been a very foolish person, and when she became gifted
with the new mind that the Prince had given her, she had forgotten all
her follies.

She had not taken another thirty steps, when Riquet with the Tuft
presented himself before her, gaily and splendidly attired, like a
Prince about to be married. "You see, madam," said he, "I keep my word
punctually, and I doubt not that you have come thither to keep yours,
and to make me, by the giving of your hand, the happiest of men."

"I confess to you, frankly," answered the Princess, "that I have not yet
made up my mind on that matter, and that I do not think I shall ever be
able to do so in the way you wish." "You astonish me, madam," said
Riquet with the Tuft. "I have no doubt I do," said the Princess; "and
assuredly, had I to deal with a stupid person, with a man without
intelligence, I should feel greatly perplexed. 'A Princess is bound by
her word,' he would say to me, 'and you must marry me, as you have
promised to do so.' But as the person to whom I speak is, of all men in
the world, the one of greatest sense and understanding, I am certain he
will listen to reason. You know that, when I was no better than a fool,
I nevertheless could not decide to marry you--how can you expect, now
that I have the mind which you have given me, and which renders me much
more difficult to please than before, that I should take to-day a
resolution which I could not then? If you seriously thought of marrying
me, you did very wrong to take away my stupidity, and so enable me to
see more clearly than I saw then." "If a man without intelligence,"
replied Riquet with the Tuft, "who reproached you with your breach of
promise, might have a right, as you have just intimated, to be treated
with indulgence, why would you, madam, that I should receive less
consideration in a matter which affects the entire happiness of my life?
Is it reasonable that persons of intellect should be in a worse position
than those that have none? Can you assert this--you who have so much,
and who so earnestly desired to possess it? But let us come to the
point, if you please. Setting aside my ugliness, is there anything in me
that displeases you? Are you dissatisfied with my birth, my
understanding, my temper, or my manners?"

"Not in the least," replied the Princess; "I admire in you everything
you have mentioned."

[Illustration: _Then said the Princess "I wish that you may be the
handsomest prince in the world."_ _Riquet with the Tuft._]

"If that is so," rejoined Riquet with the Tuft, "I shall soon be happy,
as you have it in your power to make me the most pleasing looking of
men."

"How can that be done?" asked the Princess.

"It can be done," said Riquet with the Tuft, "if you love me
sufficiently to wish that it should be. And, in order, madam, that you
should have no doubt about it, know that the same fairy, who, on the day
I was born, endowed me with the power to give intelligence to the person
I chose, gave you also the power to render handsome the man you should
love, and on whom you should wish to bestow this favour."

"If such be the fact," said the Princess, "I wish, with all my heart,
that you should become the handsomest and most lovable Prince in the
world, and I bestow the gift on you to the fullest extent in my power."

The Princess had no sooner pronounced these words than Riquet with the
Tuft appeared to her eyes, of all men in the world, the handsomest, the
best made, and most attractive she had ever seen. There are some who
assert that it was not the spell of the fairy, but love alone that
caused this metamorphosis. They say that the Princess, having reflected
on the perseverance of her lover, on his prudence, and on all the good
qualities of his heart and mind, no longer saw the deformity of his
body, or the ugliness of his features; that his hump appeared to her
nothing more than a good-natured shrug of his shoulders, and that
instead of noticing, as she had done, how badly he limped, she saw in
him only a certain lounging air, which charmed her. They say also that
his eyes, which squinted, only seemed to her the more brilliant for
this; and that the crookedness of his glance was to her merely
expressive of his great love; and, finally, that his great red nose had
in it, to her mind, something martial and heroic. However this may be,
the Princess promised on the spot to marry him, provided he obtained the
consent of the King, her father. The King, having learned that his
daughter entertained a great regard for Riquet with the Tuft, whom he
knew also to be a very clever and wise Prince, received him with
pleasure as his son-in-law. The wedding took place the next morning, as
Riquet with the Tuft had foreseen, and according to the orders which he
had given a long time before.

    No beauty, no talent, has power above
    Some indefinite charm discern'd only by love.




LITTLE THUMBLING


Once upon a time there was a woodcutter and his wife who had seven
children, all boys. The eldest was but ten years old, and the youngest
only seven. People wondered that the woodcutter had so many children so
near in age, but the fact was, that several of them were twins. He and
his wife were very poor, and their seven children were a great burden to
them, as not one of them was yet able to earn his livelihood. What
troubled them still more was, that the youngest was very delicate, and
seldom spoke, which they considered a proof of stupidity rather than of
good sense. He was very diminutive, and, when first born, scarcely
bigger than one's thumb, and so they called him Little Thumbling.

This poor child was the scapegoat of the house, and was blamed for
everything that happened. Nevertheless, he was the shrewdest and most
sensible of all his brothers, and if he spoke little, he listened a
great deal.

There came a year of bad harvest, and the famine was so severe that
these poor people determined to get rid of their children. One evening,
when they were all in bed, and the woodcutter was sitting over the fire
with his wife, he said to her, with an aching heart, "You see plainly
that we can no longer find food for our children. I cannot let them die
of hunger before my very eyes, and I have made up my mind to take them
to the wood to-morrow, and there lose them, which will be easily done,
for whilst they are busy tying up the faggots, we have only to run away
unseen by them." "Ah!" exclaimed the woodcutter's wife, "Can you find
the heart to lose your own children?" In vain her husband represented to
her their great poverty; she would not consent to the deed. She was
poor, but she was their mother. After a while, however, having thought
over the misery it would be to her to see them die of hunger, she
assented to her husband's proposal, and went weeping to bed.

Little Thumbling had overheard all they said, for having found out, as
he lay in his bed, that they were talking of their affairs, he got up
quietly and crept under his father's stool, so as to listen to what they
were saying without been seen. He went to bed again, but did not sleep a
wink the rest of the night, thinking what he should do. He got up early,
and went down to the banks of the stream; there he filled his pockets
with small white pebbles, and then returned home. They set out all
together, and Little Thumbling said not a word to his brothers of what
he had overheard. They entered a very thick forest, wherein, at ten
paces distant, they could not see one another. The woodcutter began to
cut wood, and the children to pick up brushwood for the faggots. The
father and mother, seeing them busy at work, gradually stole farther and
farther away from them, and then suddenly ran off down a little winding
path.

[Illustration: '_The boys followed him._']

When the children found themselves all alone, they began to scream and
cry with all their might. Little Thumbling let them scream, well knowing
how he could get home again, for on their way to the forest, he had
dropped all along the road the little white pebbles he had in his
pockets. He then said to them, "Have no fear, brothers; my father and
mother have left us here, but I will take you safely home; only follow
me." They followed him, and he led them back to the house by the same
road that they had taken to the forest. They were afraid to go inside at
once, but placed themselves close to the door, to listen to what their
father and mother were saying. It chanced that just at the moment that
the woodcutter and his wife reached home, the lord of the manor sent
them ten crowns, which he had owed them a long time, and which they had
given up all hope of receiving. This was new life to them, for the poor
things were actually starving. The woodcutter immediately sent his wife
to the butcher's, and, as it was many a day since they had tasted meat,
she bought three times as much as was sufficient for two people's
supper. When they had appeased their hunger, the woodcutter's wife said,
"Alas! where now are our poor children? They would fare merrily on what
we have left. But it was you, William, who would lose them. Truly did I
say we should repent it. What are they now doing in the forest? Alas!
Heaven help me! the wolves have, perhaps, already devoured them. Cruel
man that you are, thus to have lost your children!"

The woodcutter began at last to lose his temper, for she repeated over
twenty times that they would repent the deed, and that she had said it
would be so. He threatened to beat her if she did not hold her tongue.
It was not that the woodcutter was not, perhaps, even more sorry than
his wife, but that she made so much noise about it, and that he was like
many other people, who are fond of women who say the right thing, but
are annoyed by those who are always in the right. The wife was all in
tears. "Alas! where are now my children, my poor children?" She uttered
her cry, at last, so loudly, that the children, who were at the door,
heard her, and began to call out all together, "Here we are! here we
are!" She rushed to the door to open it, and embracing them, exclaimed,
"How thankful I am to see you again, my dear children; you are very
tired and hungry; and you, little Peter, how dirty you are! come here
and let me wash you." Peter was her eldest son, and she loved him better
than all the rest, because he was red-headed, and she was rather
red-haired herself. They sat down to supper and ate with an appetite
that delighted their father and mother, to whom they related how
frightened they had been in the forest, nearly all keeping on speaking
at the same time. The good people were overjoyed to see their children
around them once more, and their joy lasted as long as the ten crowns.
When the money was spent, however, they fell back into their former
state of misery, and resolved to lose their children again; and to make
quite sure of doing so this time, they determined to lead them much
further from home than they had before.

They could not talk of this so secretly, but that they were overheard by
Little Thumbling, who reckoned upon being able to get out of the
difficulty by the same means as the first time; but though he got up
very early to collect the little pebbles, he did not succeed in his
object, for he found the house door double locked. He was at his wit's
end what to do, when his mother having given each of them a piece of
bread for their breakfast, it occurred to him that he might make the
bread take the place of the pebbles, by strewing crumbs along the path
as they went, and so he put his piece in his pocket. The father and
mother led them into the thickest and darkest part of the forest, and as
soon as they had done so, they turned into a bypath, and left them
there. Little Thumbling did not trouble himself much, for he believed he
could easily find his way back by help of the crumbs which he had
scattered wherever he had passed; but he was greatly surprised to find
not a single crumb left--the birds had come and picked them all up. The
poor children were now, indeed, in great distress; the further they
wandered, the deeper they plunged into the forest. Night came on, and a
great wind arose, which filled them with terror. They fancied they heard
nothing on every side but the howling of wolves, running towards them to
devour them. They scarcely dared to speak or look behind them. Then
there came a heavy rain, which drenched them to the skin; they slipped
at every step, tumbling into the mud, out of which they scrambled
covered with dirt, not knowing what to do with their hands. Little
Thumbling climbed up a tree to try if he could see anything from the top
of it. Having looked about on all sides, he saw a little light, like
that of a candle, but it was a long way off, on the other side of the
forest. He came down again, and when he had reached the ground, he could
no longer see the light. He was in despair at this, but having walked on
with his brothers for some time in the direction of the light, he caught
sight of it again as they emerged from the forest.

At length they reached the house where the candle was shining, not
without many alarms, for often they lost sight of it altogether, and
always when they went down into the hollows. They knocked loudly at the
door, and a good woman came to open it. She asked them what they wanted.
Little Thumbling told her they were poor children who had lost their way
in the forest, and who begged a night's lodgings for charity's sake. The
woman, seeing they were all so pretty, began to weep, and said to them,
"Alas! my poor children, to what a place have you come! Know you not
that this is the house of an ogre who eats little children?" "Alas!"
replied Little Thumbling, who trembled from head to foot, as indeed did
all his brothers, "what shall we do? We shall certainly be all eaten up
by the wolves to-night, if you do not give us shelter, and, in that
case, we would rather be eaten by the ogre; perhaps he may have pity
upon us, if you are kind enough to ask him." The ogre's wife, who
thought that she might be able to hide them from her husband till the
next morning, let the children come in, and led them where they could
warm themselves by a good fire, for there was a whole sheep on the spit,
roasting for the ogre's supper.

Just as they were beginning to get warm they heard two or three loud
knocks at the door. It was the ogre who had come home. His wife
immediately made the children hide under the bed, and went to open the
door. The ogre first asked if his supper was ready, and if she had drawn
the wine, and with that he sat down to his meal. The mutton was all but
raw, but he liked it all the better for that. He sniffed right and left,
saying that he smelt fresh meat. "It must be the calf I have just
skinned," said his wife. "I tell you, I smell fresh meat," replied the
ogre, giving an angry glance at his wife; "there is something here I do
not understand." With these words, he rose from the table and went
straight towards the bed. "Ah!" he exclaimed, "so this is the way in
which you would deceive me, you wretched woman! I do not know what
hinders me from eating you also! It is well for you that you are such an
old creature! But here is some game, which comes in handy, and will
serve to feast three of my ogre friends, who are soon coming to pay me a
visit." He dragged the children from under the bed, one after the other.
They fell upon their knees, begging for mercy, but they had to deal with
the most cruel of all the ogres, and who, far from feeling pity for
them, devoured them already with his eyes, and said to his wife that
they would be dainty bits, when she had made a good sauce for them. He
went and took up a large knife, and as he came towards the children
again, he whetted it on a long stone that he held in his left hand. He
had already seized one of them, when his wife said to him, "Why are you
doing that at this hour of night? Will it not be time enough to-morrow?"
"Hold your peace," replied the ogre. "They will be the more tender."
"But you have already too much food," continued his wife. "Here are a
calf, two sheep, and half a pig." "You are right," said the ogre, "give
them a good supper, that they may keep plump, and then put them to bed."
The good woman was rejoiced, and brought them plenty of supper; but they
could not eat, they were so overcome with fright. As for the ogre, he
seated himself to drink again, delighted to think he had such a treat in
store for his friends. He drained a dozen goblets more than usual, which
made him feel sleepy and heavy, and obliged him to go to bed.

The ogre had seven daughters, who were still young children. These
little ogresses had the most beautiful complexions, as they lived on
fresh meat like their father; but they had very small round grey eyes,
hooked noses, and very large mouths, with long teeth, exceedingly sharp,
and wide apart. They were not very wicked as yet; but they promised to
become so, for they already began to bite little children, that they
might suck their blood. They had been sent to bed early, and were all
seven in a large bed, each wearing a crown of gold on her head. In the
same room was another bed of the same size. It was in this bed that the
ogre's wife put the seven little boys to sleep, after which she went to
bed herself.

Little Thumbling, who had noticed that the ogre's daughters had golden
crowns on their heads, and who was afraid that the ogre might repent not
having killed him and his brothers that evening, got up in the middle of
the night, and, taking off his own nightcap, and those of his brothers,
went very softly and placed them on the heads of the ogre's daughters,
first taking off their golden crowns, which he put on his brothers and
himself, in order that the ogre might mistake them for his daughters,
and his daughters for the boys whom he wanted to kill.

Everything turned out as Little Thumbling had expected. The ogre awoke
at midnight, and regretted having put off till the morning what he might
have done the evening before. He, therefore, jumped suddenly out of bed,
and seizing his great knife, "Let us go, and see," said he, "how the
young rogues are getting on! I will not think twice about it this time."
So he stole on tiptoes up to his daughters' bedroom, and went up to the
bed in which lay the little boys, who were all asleep except Thumbling,
who was dreadfully frightened when the ogre put his hand on his head to
feel it, as he had in turn felt those of his brothers. The ogre, feeling
the golden crowns, said, "Truly, I was about to do a pretty piece of
work! It's plain I drank too much wine last night." He then went to the
bed where his daughters slept, and having felt the little nightcaps that
belonged to the boys, "Aha!" cried he, "here are our fine young fellows.
Let us to work boldly!" So saying, he, without pause, cut the throats of
his seven daughters.

Well satisfied with his deed, he returned and lay down beside his wife.
As soon as Little Thumbling heard the ogre snoring, he awoke his
brothers, and bade them dress themselves quickly and follow him. They
crept down into the garden and jumped over the wall. They ran nearly all
night long, trembling the whole time, and not knowing whither they were
going. The ogre, awaking in the morning, said to his wife, "Go upstairs
and dress those young scamps you took in last night." The ogress was
astonished at her husband's kindness, never guessing what he meant, and
only fancying that he wished her to go and put on their clothes. She
went upstairs, where she was horrified to find that her own children had
been killed. The first thing she did was to faint, for it is the first
thing that almost all women do in similar circumstances. The ogre,
fearing that his wife would be too long over the job he had given her to
do, went upstairs to help her. His surprise was not less than had been
his wife's, when his eyes fell on the frightful spectacle.

"Ah! what have I done?" he exclaimed. "The young wretches shall pay for
it, and that at once." He threw a jugful of water in his wife's face,
and having brought her to, said, "Quick! fetch me my seven-league
boots, that I may go after them and catch them." He set out, and after
running in every direction, came at last upon the track of the poor
children, who were not more than a hundred yards from their father's
house. They saw the ogre striding from hill to hill, and stepping over
rivers as easily as if they were the smallest brooks. Little Thumbling,
who caught sight of a hollow rock close by where they were, hid his
brothers in it, and crept in after them, keeping his eye on the ogre all
the while. The ogre, feeling very tired with his long journey to no
purpose--for seven-league boots are very fatiguing to the
wearer--thought he should like to rest, and, by chance, sat down on the
very rock in which the little boys had concealed themselves. As he was
quite worn out, he had not rested long before he fell asleep, and began
to snore so dreadfully, that the poor children were not less frightened
than they were when he took up the great knife to cut their throats.

Little Thumbling was not so much alarmed, and told his brothers to run
quickly into the house while the ogre was sound asleep, and not to be
uneasy about him. They took his advice and soon reached home. Little
Thumbling then going up to the ogre, gently pulled off his boots, and
put them on himself. The boots were very large and very long; but as
they were enchanted boots, they had the quality of becoming larger or
smaller according to the leg of the person who wore them, so that they
fitted him as if they had been made for him. He went straight to the
ogre's house, where he found the wife weeping over her murdered
daughters. "Your husband," said Little Thumbling to her, "is in great
danger, for he has been seized by a band of robbers, who have sworn to
kill him if he does not give them all his gold and silver. Just as they
had their daggers at his throat, he saw me, and begged me to come and
tell you what had happened to him, and sent word that you were to give
me all his ready money, without keeping back any of it, as otherwise
they will kill him without mercy. As time pressed, he insisted on my
taking his seven-league boots, which you see I have on, in order that I
might make haste, and also that you might be sure I was not imposing
upon you."

The good woman, very much alarmed, immediately gave him all the money
she could find, for the ogre was not a bad husband to her, although he
ate little children. Little Thumbling, thus laden with all the ogre's
wealth, hastened back to his father's house, where he was received with
great joy.

There are many persons who differ in their account of this part of the
story, and who pretend that Little Thumbling never stole the ogre's
money, and that he really only took the seven-league boots, as he felt
no scruple in doing this, seeing that the ogre used them expressly for
running after little children. These people assert that they have heard
it from good authority, and that they have eaten and drunk in the
woodcutter's house. They assure us that when Little Thumbling had put on
the ogre's boots, he went to Court, where he knew they were in much
trouble about an army which was within two hundred leagues of them, and
were anxious to hear the result of a battle that had been fought. They
say he went to find the King, and told him that, if he wished it, he
would bring him back news of the army before the end of the day. The
King promised him a large sum of money if he did so.

Little Thumbling brought news that very evening, and this first journey
having made him well known, he got whatever he chose to ask, for the
King paid him most liberally for carrying his orders to the army; a
great number of ladies also gave him whatever he wished, in return for
news of their lovers, and this brought him in the greatest gain.

After he had been a courier for some time, and had saved a great deal of
money, he returned to his father, and it is impossible to imagine the
joy of his family at seeing him again. He made them all comfortable. He
bought newly-made offices for his father and brothers, and by these
means established them all, making his own way at Court at the same
time.

    Often is the handsome boy
    Made, alone, his father's joy;
    While the tiny, timid child
    Is neglected, or reviled,
    Notwithstanding, sometimes he
    Lives, of all, the prop to be.




BEAUTY AND THE BEAST


There was once a merchant, who was very, very rich. He had six children,
three boys and three girls, and as he was a man of good sense, he spared
no expense in order that they might be well educated, and gave them
masters of every kind. His daughters were all beautiful, but his
youngest one was especially admired, and from the time she was a small
child, had been only known and spoken of as "Beauty." The name remained
with her as she grew older, which gave rise to a great deal of jealousy
on the part of her sisters. The young girl was not only more beautiful
than they were, but also kinder and more amiable. The elder daughters
gave themselves great airs, for they were overweeningly proud of being
so rich, and would not condescend to receive visits from the daughters
of other merchants, as they only cared for the society of people in high
position. Not a day passed that they did not go to a ball, or a theatre,
or for a drive or walk in a fashionable part of the town, and they made
fun of their sister, who spent a great part of her time in study. The
girls received many offers of marriage from well-to-do merchants, as
they were known to be rich, but the two elder ones replied, that they
did not intend to marry anyone, unless a duke or an earl could be found
for a husband.

Beauty, the youngest, was more polite, and thanked those who asked for
her hand, but she was, as she told them, too young as yet, and wished to
remain for a few more years as a companion to her father.

Then, all at once, the merchant lost the whole of his fortune; nothing
was left to him but a little house, situated far away in the country. He
told his children, weeping, that they would be obliged to go and live
there, and that, even then, they would have to support themselves by the
work of their own hands. His two elder daughters refused to leave the
town; they had many admirers, they said, who would be only too glad to
marry them, although they were now without fortune. But these young
ladies found themselves greatly mistaken, for their admirers did not
even care to look at them, now that they were poor. They had made
themselves generally disliked, on account of their haughty behaviour.
"They do not deserve to be pitied," said everyone; "we are very glad
that their pride is humbled; let them go and play the fine lady, keeping
sheep." But people spoke differently of Beauty. "We are very sorry,"
they said, "that she is in trouble; she is such a good girl! she always
spoke so kindly to the poor! she was so gentle and courteous!" Several
of her suitors, also, still wished to marry her, although she had not a
penny, but she told them that she could not think of leaving her father
in his distress, and that she intended going with him into the country,
to comfort him, and help with the work. Beauty was very unhappy at
losing her fortune, but she said to herself, "It is no use crying, tears
will not give me back my riches; I must try and be happy without them."

As soon as they were settled in their country house, the merchant and
his sons began to till the ground. Beauty rose every morning at four
o'clock, and made haste to clean the house and prepare the dinner. She
found her duties very painful and fatiguing at first, for she had not
been accustomed to do the work of a servant; but in two months' time she
had grown stronger, and the activity of her life gave her fresh health
and colour. When her day's work was over, she amused herself with
reading, or music; sometimes she sat down to her wheel, and sang to her
spinning. Meanwhile her two sisters were wearied to death with the
dulness of their life; they stayed in bed till ten o'clock, did nothing
all day but saunter about, and for their only diversion talked with
regret of their former fine clothes and friends. "Look at our young
sister," they said to one another; "she is so low-minded and stupid,
that she is quite content with her miserable condition."

The good merchant thought differently: he knew that Beauty was better
fitted to shine in society than they were; he admired the good qualities
of his youngest child, especially her patience, for her sisters, not
content with allowing her to do all the work of the house, took every
opportunity of insulting her.

The family had lived in this solitude for a year, when a letter arrived
for the merchant, telling him that a vessel, on which there was
merchandise belonging to him, had arrived safely in port. The two elder
girls were nearly out of their minds with joy when they heard this good
news, for now they hoped that they should be able to leave the country.
They begged their father, ere he departed, to bring them back dresses
and capes, head-dresses, and all sorts of odds and ends of fancy attire.
Beauty asked for nothing; for, as she thought to herself, all the money
that the merchandise would bring in, would not be sufficient to pay for
everything that her sisters wished for. "Is there nothing you wish me to
buy for you?" her father said to her. "As you are so kind as to think of
me," she replied, "I pray you to bring me a rose, for we have not one
here." Now Beauty did not really care about the rose, but she had no
wish to seem, by her example, to reprove her sisters, who would have
said that she did not ask for anything, in order to make herself appear
more considerate than they were.

The father left them, but on arriving at his destination, he had to go
to law about his merchandise, and after a great deal of trouble, he
turned back home as poor as he came. He had not many more miles to go,
and was already enjoying, in anticipation, the pleasure of seeing his
children again, when, passing on his journey through a large wood, he
lost his way. It was snowing hard; the wind was so violent that he was
twice blown off his horse, and, as the night was closing in, he was
afraid that he would die of cold and hunger, or that he would be eaten
by the wolves, that he could hear howling around him. All at once,
however, he caught sight of a bright light, which appeared to be some
way off, at the further end of a long avenue of trees. He walked towards
it, and soon saw that it came from a splendid castle, which was
brilliantly illuminated. The merchant thanked God for the help that had
been sent him, and hastened towards the castle, but was greatly
surprised, on reaching it, to find no one in the courtyard, or about the
entrances. His horse, which was following him, seeing the door of a
large stable standing open, went in, and finding there some hay and
oats, the poor animal, half dead for want of food, began eating with
avidity.

The merchant fastened him up in the stable, and went towards the house,
but still no one was to be seen; he walked into a large dining-hall, and
there he found a good fire, and a table laid for one person, covered
with provisions. Being wet to the skin with the rain and snow, he drew
near the fire to dry himself, saying, as he did so, "The master of this
house, or his servants, will pardon me the liberty I am taking; no doubt
they will soon appear." He waited for a considerable time; but when
eleven o'clock had struck, and still he had seen no one, he could no
longer resist the feeling of hunger, and seizing a chicken, he ate it up
in two mouthfuls, trembling the while. Then he took a draught or two of
wine, and, his courage returning, he left the dining-hall and made his
way through several large rooms magnificently furnished. Finally he came
to a room where there was a comfortable bed, and as it was now past
midnight, and he was very tired, he made up his mind to shut the door
and lie down.

It was ten o'clock next morning before he awoke, when, to his great
surprise, he found new clothes put in place of his own, which had been
completely spoiled. "This palace must certainly belong to some good
fairy," he said to himself, "who, seeing my condition, has taken pity
upon me." He looked out of the window; the snow was gone, and he saw
instead, bowers of delicious flowers which were a delight to the eye.

He went again into the dining-hall where he had supped the night before,
and saw a little table with chocolate upon it. "I thank you, good madam
fairy," he said aloud, "for your kindness in thinking of my breakfast."

The merchant, having drunk his chocolate, went out to find his horse; as
he passed under a bower of roses, he remembered that Beauty had asked
him to bring her one, and he plucked a branch on which several were
growing. He had scarcely done so, when he heard a loud roar, and saw
coming towards him a Beast, of such a horrible aspect, that he nearly
fainted. "You are very ungrateful," said the Beast in a terrible voice;
"I received you into my castle, and saved your life, and now you steal
my roses, which I care for more than anything else in the world. Death
alone can make amends for what you have done; I give you a quarter of an
hour, no more, in which to ask forgiveness of God."

The merchant threw himself on his knees, and with clasped hands, said to
the Beast, "I pray you, my lord, to forgive me. I did not think to
offend you by picking a rose for one of my daughters, who asked me to
take it her." "I am not called my lord," responded the monster, "but
simply the Beast, I do not care for compliments; I like people to say
what they think; so do not think to mollify me with your flattery. But
you tell me you have some daughters; I will pardon you on condition that
one of your daughters will come of her own free will to die in your
place. Do not stop to argue with me; go! and if your daughter refuses to
die for you, swear that you will return yourself in three months' time."

The merchant had no intention of sacrificing one of his daughters to
this hideous monster, but he thought, "At least I shall have the
pleasure of embracing them once more." He swore therefore to return, and
the Beast told him that he might go when he liked; "but," added he, "I
do not wish you to go from me with empty hands. Go back to the room in
which you slept, there you will find a large empty trunk; you may fill
it with whatever you please, and I will have it conveyed to your house."
With these words the Beast withdrew, and the merchant said to himself,
"If I must die, I shall at least have the consolation of leaving my
children enough for their daily bread."

He returned to the room where he had passed the night, and finding there
a great quantity of gold pieces, he filled the trunk, of which the Beast
had spoken, with these, closed it, and remounting his horse, which he
found still in the stable, he rode out from the castle, his sadness now
as great as had been his joy on entering it. His horse carried him of
its own accord along one of the roads through the forest, and in a few
hours the merchant was again in his own little house.

His children gathered round him; but instead of finding pleasure in
their caresses, he began to weep as he looked upon them. He held in his
hand the branch of roses which he had brought for Beauty. "Take them,"
he said, as he gave them to her, "your unhappy father has paid dearly
for them." And then he told his family of the melancholy adventure that
had befallen him.

The two elder girls, when they had heard his tale, cried and screamed,
and began saying all sorts of cruel things to Beauty, who did not shed a
tear. "See what the pride of this wretched little creature has brought
us to!" said they. "Why couldn't she ask for wearing apparel as we did?
but no, she must needs show herself off as a superior person. It is she
who will be the cause of our father's death, and she does not even cry!"

"That would be of little use," replied Beauty. "Why should I cry about
my father's death? He is not going to die. Since the monster is willing
to accept one of his daughters, I will give myself up to him, that he
may vent his full anger upon me; and I am happy in so doing, for by my
death I shall have the joy of saving my father, and of proving my love
for him."

"No, my sister," said the three brothers, "you shall not die; we will go
and find out this monster, and we will either kill him or die beneath
his blows." "Do not hope to kill him," said their father to them; "for
the Beast is so powerful, that I fear there are no means by which he
could be destroyed. My Beauty's loving heart fills mine with gladness,
but she shall not be exposed to such a terrible death. I am old, I have
but a little while to live; I shall but lose a few years of life, which
I regret on your account, and on yours alone, my children."

"I am determined, my father," said Beauty, "that you shall not return to
that castle without me; you cannot prevent me following you. Although I
am young, life has no great attraction for me, and I would far rather be
devoured by the monster than die of the grief which your death would
cause me."

In vain the others tried to dissuade her, Beauty persisted in her
determination to go to the castle; and her sisters were not sorry about
it, for the virtues of their young sister had aroused in them a strong
feeling of jealousy.

The merchant was so taken up with grief at losing his daughter, that he
quite forgot about the trunk which he had filled with gold pieces, but,
to his astonishment, he had no sooner shut himself into his room for the
night, than he found it beside his bed. He resolved not to tell his
children of his newly-obtained riches, for he knew that his daughters
would then wish to return to the town, and he had made up his mind to
die where he was in the country. He confided his secret, however, to
Beauty, who told him that there had been visitors at the house during
his absence, among them two who were in love with her sisters. She
begged her father to marry them; for she was so good of heart, that she
loved them and freely forgave them all the unkindness they had shown
her.

The two hard-hearted girls rubbed their eyes with an onion that they
might shed tears on the departure of their father and Beauty; but the
brothers wept sincerely, as did also the merchant; Beauty alone would
not cry, fearing that it might increase their sorrow. The horse took the
road that led to the castle, and as evening fell, it came in view,
illuminated as before. Again the horse was the only one in the stable,
and once more the merchant entered the large dining-hall, this time with
his daughter, and there they found the table magnificently laid for two.

The merchant had not the heart to eat; but Beauty, doing her utmost to
appear cheerful, sat down to the table and served him to something. Then
she said to herself, "The Beast wants to fatten me before he eats me,
since he provides such good cheer."

They had finished their supper, when they heard a great noise, and the
merchant, weeping, said farewell to his poor daughter, for he knew it
was the Beast. Beauty could not help shuddering when she saw the
dreadful shape approaching; but she did her best not to give way to her
fear, and when the Beast asked her if it was of her own free will that
she had come, she told him, trembling, that it was so. "You are very
good, and I am much obliged to you," said the Beast. "Good man,
to-morrow morning you will leave, and do not venture ever to come here
again." "Good-bye, Beast," replied Beauty, and the Beast immediately
retired. "Alas! my daughter," said the merchant, clasping Beauty in his
arms, "I am half dead with fright. Listen to me, and leave me here."
"No, my father," said Beauty, without faltering. "You will depart
to-morrow morning, and you will leave me under Heaven's protection,
maybe I shall find pity and help."

[Illustration: '_Her father was just arriving._' _Beauty & the Beast_]

They retired to rest, thinking that they would have no sleep that night;
but no sooner were they in bed than their eyes closed. In her dreams
there appeared to Beauty a lady, who said to her, "I have pleasure in
the goodness of your heart, Beauty; your good action in giving your life
to save that of your father will not be without its reward." Beauty told
her father next morning of her dream, and although it afforded him some
consolation, it did not prevent his loud cries of grief when at last he
was forced to bid good-bye to his dear daughter.

After his departure, Beauty went back and sat down in the dining-hall,
and began weeping herself. She was, however, of a courageous
disposition, and so she commended herself to God, and resolved not to be
miserable during the short time still left her to live, for she quite
thought that the Beast would eat her that evening. In the meanwhile she
resolved to walk about and look over the fine castle she was in. She
found it impossible not to admire its beauty, but her surprise was great
when she came to a door over which was written: Beauty's Room. She
hastily opened the door, and was dazzled by the magnificence of the
whole apartment; what most attracted her admiration, however, was a
large bookcase, a piano, and several books of music.

"He does not wish me to feel dull," she said in a low voice. Then the
thought came to her, "If I was only going to live here a day, there
would not have been so much provided for my amusement." This thought
revived her courage.

She opened the bookcase and there saw a book on which was written in
letters of gold:--

"Wish what you like, Command what you will, You alone are Queen and
Mistress here."

"Alas!" she murmured, sighing, "I wish for nothing but to see my dear
father again, and to know what he is doing at this moment." She had only
said this to herself in a low voice, what was her surprise, therefore,
when, turning towards a large mirror, she saw her home, and her father,
just returned, wearing a sad countenance; her sisters went forward to
meet him, and in spite of the expression of sorrow which they tried to
assume, it was evident in their faces that they were delighted to have
lost their sister. In another minute, the picture had disappeared, and
Beauty could not help thinking that the Beast was very kind hearted, and
that she had not much to fear from him.

She found the table laid for her at noon, and during her dinner she was
entertained with a delightful concert, although no creature was visible.

In the evening, as she was just sitting down to her meal, she heard the
sound of the Beast's voice, and could not help shuddering. "Beauty,"
said the monster to her, "will you allow me to look on while you are
eating your supper?" "You are master here," replied Beauty, trembling.
"Not so," rejoined the Beast, "it is you who alone are mistress; if I
annoy you, you have only to tell me to go, and I will leave you at
once. But confess now, you think me very ugly, do you not?" "That is
true," said Beauty, "for I cannot tell a lie; but I think you are very
kind."

"You are right," said the monster; "but, besides being ugly, I am also
stupid; I know, well enough, that I am only a Beast."

"No one is stupid, who believes himself to be wanting in intelligence,
it is the fool who is not aware of being without it." "Eat, Beauty,"
said the monster to her, "and try to find pleasure in your own house;
for everything here belongs to you. I should be very sorry if you were
unhappy." "You are everything that is kind," said Beauty. "I assure you
that your goodness of heart makes me happy; when I think of that, you no
longer appear so ugly to me." "Ah, yes!" replied the Beast, "I have a
kind heart, but for all that I am a monster." "Many men are more
monsters than you," said Beauty; "and I care more for you with your
countenance, than for those who with their human face hide a false,
corrupt, and ungrateful heart." "If I had sufficient wit," responded the
Beast, "I would make you a pretty answer in return for your words; but I
am too stupid for that, and all I can say is, that I am very grateful to
you."

Beauty ate her supper with a good appetite. She had lost almost all her
fear of the monster, but she almost died of fright, when he said,
"Beauty, will you be my wife?"

She sat for a while without answering; she was alarmed at the thought of
arousing the monster's anger by refusing him. Nevertheless she finally
said, trembling, "No, Beast." At this the poor monster sighed, and the
hideous sound he made echoed throughout the castle, but Beauty was soon
reassured, for the Beast, after sadly bidding her adieu, left the room,
turning his head from time to time to look at her again.

A strong feeling of compassion for the Beast came over Beauty when she
was left alone. "Alas!" she said, "it is a pity he is so ugly, for he is
so good!"

Beauty spent three months in the castle, more or less happily. The Beast
paid her a visit every evening, and conversed with her as she ate her
supper, showing good sense in his talk, but not what the world deems
cleverness. Every day Beauty discovered some fresh good quality in the
monster; she grew accustomed to his ugliness, and far from fearing his
visit, she would often look at her watch to see if it was nearly nine
o'clock, for the Beast always arrived punctually at that hour. There was
only one thing which caused distress to Beauty, and that was, that every
evening before retiring, the monster asked her if she would be his wife,
and always appeared overcome with sorrow at her refusal. One day she
said to him, "You grieve me, Beast; I wish it were possible for me to
marry you, but I am too truthful to make you believe that such a thing
could ever happen; I shall always be your friend, try to be satisfied
with that." "I suppose I must," responded the Beast; "I know I am
horrible to look upon, but I love you very much. However, I am but too
happy that you consent to remain here; promise me that you will never
leave me." The colour came into Beauty's face; her mirror had shown her
that her father was ill with the grief of losing her, and she was hoping
to see him again. "I would promise without hesitation never to leave
you," said Beauty to him, "but I do so long to see my father again, that
I shall die of sorrow if you refuse me this pleasure." "I would rather
die myself," said the monster, "than give you pain; I will send you home
to your father, you will stay there, and your poor Beast will die of
grief at your absence." "No, no," said Beauty, crying; "I care for you
too much to wish to cause your death; I promise to return in a week's
time. You have let me see that my sisters are married, and that my
brothers have entered the army. My father is all alone, let me remain
with him a week." "You shall be with him to-morrow morning, but remember
your promise. When you wish to return, you have only to put your ring on
the table before going to bed. Farewell, Beauty." The Beast gave his
usual sigh as he said these words, and Beauty went to bed feeling
troubled at the thought of the sorrow she had caused him. When she awoke
the following morning, she found herself at home, and ringing a little
bell that stood beside her bed, the maid-servant came in, who gave a
loud cry of astonishment at seeing her there. Her father ran in on
hearing the cry, and almost died of joy when he found his dear daughter,
and they remained clasped in each other's arms for more than a quarter
of an hour.

Beauty, after the first transports of joy were over, remembered that she
had no clothes with her; but the servant told her that she had just
found a trunk in the next room, in which were dresses of gold fabric,
trimmed with diamonds. Beauty thanked the kind Beast for his
thoughtfulness. She took out the least costly of the dresses, and told
the maid to lock the others away again, as she wished to give them to
her sisters; but she had no sooner uttered these words, than the trunk
disappeared. Her father said to her that the Beast evidently wished her
to keep them all for herself, and the trunk and the dresses immediately
reappeared.

Beauty dressed herself, and, meanwhile, news of her arrival was sent to
her sisters, who came in haste with their husbands. They were both
extremely unhappy. The eldest had married a young man who was as
handsome as nature could make him, but he was so in love with his own
face, that he could think of nothing else from morning to night, and
cared nothing for the beauty of his wife. The second had married a very
witty and clever man, but he only made use of his ability to put
everybody in a bad temper, beginning with his wife.

Her sisters nearly died of envy when they saw Beauty dressed like a
princess, and beautiful as the day. In vain she showered caresses upon
them, nothing could stifle their jealousy, which only increased when she
told them how happy she was.

These two jealous creatures went into the garden, that they might cry
more at their ease. They said to one another, "Why should this wretched
little thing be happier than we are? Are we not more attractive than she
is?"

"Sister," said the eldest one, "an idea has occurred to me: let us try
to keep her here over the week. Her stupid old Beast will be enraged at
her breaking her word, and perhaps he will devour her." "You are right,
sister," replied the other; "to carry out our plan, we must appear very
loving and kind to her." And having settled this, they went back to the
house and were so affectionate to her, that Beauty cried for joy. When
the week drew to a close, the two sisters showed such signs of grief at
her departure, and made such lamentation, that she promised to stay till
the end of the second one. Beauty, however, reproached herself for the
sorrow she would cause her poor Beast, whom she loved with all her
heart; and she began to miss him very much. On the tenth night of her
absence, she dreamed that she was in the garden of the castle, and that
she saw the Beast lying on the grass, apparently dying, and that he
reproached her with her ingratitude. Beauty awoke with a start, and
wept. "I am indeed wicked," she said, "to behave so ungratefully to a
Beast who has been so considerate and kind to me! Is it his fault that
he is ugly and that he is not clever? He is good, and that is worth
everything else. Why did I refuse to marry him? I should be happier with
him than my sisters are with their husbands. It is neither beauty nor
wit in a husband which makes a wife happy; it is amiability of
character, uprightness and generosity: and the Beast has all these good
qualities. I do not love him, but I respect him, and I feel both
affection for him, and gratitude. I will not make him unhappy; should I
do so, I should reproach myself for it as long as I live."

With these words, Beauty rose, placed her ring on a table, and lay down
again. The moment she was in bed, she fell asleep, and when she awoke
next morning, she saw with delight that she was back in the Beast's
castle. She dressed herself magnificently, in order to please him, and
the hours seemed to drag as she waited for nine o'clock to strike; but
the hour came, and the Beast did not appear.

Then Beauty began to fear that she had caused his death. She ran through
the castle, uttering loud cries, for she was in despair. After having
looked everywhere, she remembered her dream, and ran into the garden
towards the water, where she had seen him in her sleep. She found the
poor Beast stretched on the ground, and unconscious, and she thought he
was dead. Forgetting her horror at his appearance, she threw herself
upon him, and feeling that his heart was still beating, she fetched some
water and threw it over his head. The Beast opened his eyes, and said to
Beauty, "You forgot your promise; in my grief at losing you, I
determined to let myself die of hunger; but I die happy, since I have
had the joy of seeing you once again." "No, my dear Beast, you shall not
die," exclaimed Beauty. "You shall live to be my husband; I am yours
from this moment, and only yours. Alas! I thought the feeling I had for
you was only one of friendship; but now I know, by the grief I feel,
that I cannot live without you." Beauty had scarcely uttered these words
before she saw the castle suddenly become brilliantly illuminated,
while fire-works, music, everything indicated the celebration of some
joyful event. She did not gaze long, however, at these splendours, but
quickly turned her eyes again towards her dear Beast, the thought of
whose danger made her tremble with anxiety. But what was her surprise
when she saw that the Beast had disappeared, and that a young and
handsome Prince was lying at her feet, who thanked her for having
released him from enchantment. Although this Prince was fully worthy of
her attention, Beauty, nevertheless, could not help asking what had
become of the Beast. "You see him at your feet," said the Prince to her.
"A wicked fairy condemned me to remain in the form of a monster, until
some fair damsel would consent to marry me, and she forbade me also to
betray that I had intelligence. You are the only one who has been kind
enough to allow the goodness of my heart to touch yours, and I cannot,
even by offering you my crown, acquit myself of obligation to you."

Beauty, agreeably surprised, gave the young Prince her hand, to help him
to rise. They passed, side by side, into the castle, and Beauty nearly
died of joy, when she found her father and all her family assembled in
the dining-hall, the beautiful lady whom she had seen in her dream
having transported them thither. "Beauty," said the lady, who was a
well-known fairy, "receive the recompense of your noble choice; you
preferred virtue to beauty or intelligence, and you therefore deserve to
find all these qualities united in one person. You are soon to become a
great queen; I trust your exalted position will not destroy your good
disposition. As for you," said the fairy, turning to Beauty's sisters,
"I know your hearts and all the malice concealed in them. Be turned,
therefore, into statues, but preserve your consciousness beneath the
stone which will envelop you. You will remain at the entrance of your
sister's palace, and I impose no further punishment upon you, than to be
the constant witnesses of her happiness. You will not be able to resume
your present forms, until you have recognised and confessed your faults,
but I greatly fear that you will always remain statues. Pride, anger,
greediness, and laziness may be corrected; but nothing short of a
miracle can convert the envious and malicious heart." The fairy then
gave a tap with her wand, and all those assembled in the dining-hall
were immediately transported into the Prince's kingdom. His subjects
greeted him with joy; he married Beauty, who lived a long life with him
of perfect happiness, for it was founded upon virtue.




THE BENEVOLENT FROG


There was once a King who for many years had been engaged in a war with
his neighbours; a great number of battles had been fought, and at last
the enemy laid siege to his capital. The King, fearing for the safety of
the Queen, begged her to retire to a fortified castle, which he himself
had never visited but once. The Queen endeavoured, with many prayers and
tears, to persuade him to allow her to remain beside him and to share
his fate, and it was with loud cries of grief that she was put into her
chariot by the King to be driven away. He ordered his guards, however,
to accompany her, and promised to steal away when possible to visit her.
He tried to comfort her with this hope, although he knew that there was
little chance of fulfilling it, for the castle stood a long distance
off, surrounded by a thick forest, and only those who were well
acquainted with the roads could possibly find their way to it.

The Queen parted from her husband, broken-hearted at leaving him exposed
to the dangers of war; she travelled by easy stages, in case the fatigue
of so long a journey should make her ill; at last she reached the
castle, feeling low-spirited and distressed. When sufficiently rested,
she walked about the surrounding country, but found nothing to interest
her or divert her thoughts. She saw only far-spreading desert tracts on
either side, which gave her more pain than pleasure to look upon; sadly
she gazed around her, exclaiming at intervals, "What a contrast between
this place and that in which I have lived all my life! If I stay here
long I shall die! To whom have I to talk in these solitudes? With whom
can I share my troubles? What have I done to the King that he should
banish me? He wishes me, it seems, to feel the full bitterness of our
separation, by exiling me to this miserable castle."

Thus she lamented; and although the King wrote daily to her, and sent
her good news of the progress of the siege, she grew more and more
unhappy, and at last determined that she would return to him. Knowing,
however, that the officers who were in attendance upon her had received
orders not to take her back, unless the King sent a special messenger,
she kept her design secret, but ordered a small chariot to be built for
her, in which there was only room for one, saying that she should like
sometimes to accompany the hunt. She drove herself, and followed so
closely on the hounds, that the huntsmen were left behind; by this means
she had sole command of her chariot, and could get away whenever she
liked. Her only difficulty was her ignorance of the roads that traversed
the forest; but she trusted to the kindness of Providence to bring her
safely through it. She gave word that there was to be a great hunt, and
that she wished everybody to be there; she herself would go in her
chariot, and each was to follow a different route, that there might be
no possibility of escape for the wild beasts. Everything was done
according to her orders. The young Queen, feeling sure that she should
soon see her husband again, dressed herself as becomingly as possible;
her hat was covered with feathers of different colours, the front of her
dress lavishly trimmed with precious stones, and her beauty, which was
of no ordinary kind, made her seem, when so adorned, a second Diana.

While everybody was occupied with the pleasures of the hunt, she gave
rein to her horses, encouraged them with voice and whip, and soon their
quickened pace became a gallop; then, taking the bit between their
teeth, they flew along at such a speed, that the chariot seemed borne by
the winds, and the eye could scarcely follow it. Too late the poor Queen
repented of her rashness: "What could I have been thinking of?" she
said. "How could I have imagined that I should be able to control such
wild and fiery horses? Alas! what will become of me? What would the King
do if he knew the great danger I am in, he who loves me so dearly, and
who only sent me away that I might be in greater safety! This is my
gratitude for his tender care!" The air resounded with her piteous
lamentations; she invoked Heaven, she called the fairies to her
assistance, but it seemed that all the powers had abandoned her. The
chariot was overthrown; she had not sufficient strength to jump quickly
enough to the ground, and her foot was caught between the wheel and the
axle-tree; it was only by a miracle she was saved.

She remained stretched on the ground at the foot of a tree; her heart
scarcely beat, she could not speak, and her face was covered with blood.
She lay thus for a long time; when at last she opened her eyes, she saw,
standing near her, a woman of gigantic stature, clothed only in a lion's
skin, with bare arms and legs, her hair tied up with the dried skin of a
snake, the head of which dangled over her shoulders; in her hand was a
club made of stone, which served her as a walking-stick, and a quiver
full of arrows was fastened to her side. When the Queen caught sight of
this extraordinary figure, she felt sure that she was dead, for she did
not think it was possible that she could be alive after such a terrible
accident, and she said in a low voice to herself, "I am not surprised
that it is so difficult to resolve to die, since what is to be seen in
the other world is so frightful." The giantess, who overheard her words,
could not help laughing at the Queen's idea that she was dead. "Take
courage," she said to her, "for know that you are still among the
living; but your fate is none the less sad. I am the Fairy Lioness,
whose dwelling is near here; you must come and live with me." The Queen
looked sorrowfully at her, and said, "If you will be good enough, Madam
Lioness, to take me back to my castle, and tell the King what ransom you
demand, he loves me so dearly, that he will not refuse you even the half
of his kingdom." "No," replied the giantess, "I am rich enough, but for
some time past my lonely life has seemed dull to me; you are
intelligent, and will be able perhaps to amuse me." As she finished
speaking, she took the form of a lioness, and placing the Queen on her
back, she carried her to the depths of her cave, and there rubbed her
with a spirit which quickly healed the Queen's wounds. But what surprise
and misery for the Queen to find herself in this dreadful abode! It was
only reached by ten thousand steps, which led down to the centre of the
earth; there was no light but that shed by a number of tall lamps, which
were reflected in a lake of quicksilver. This lake was covered with
monsters, each hideous enough to have frightened a less timid queen;
there were owls, screech-owls, ravens, and other birds of ill omen,
filling the air with discordant sounds; in the distance could be seen
rising a mountain whence flowed the sluggish waters of a stream composed
of all the tears shed by unhappy lovers, from the reservoirs of their
sad loves. The trees were bare of leaves and fruit, the ground covered
with marigolds, briars, and nettles.

[Illustration: _She saw beside her a woman of a gigantic size._]

The food corresponded to the climate of this miserable country; for a
few dried roots, some horse-chestnuts, and thorn-apples, were all that
was provided by the Fairy Lioness to appease the hunger of those who
fell into her hands.

As soon as the Queen was well enough to begin work, the fairy told her
she could build herself a hut, as she was going to remain with her for
the rest of her life. On hearing this, the Queen could no longer
restrain her tears: "Alas, what have I done to you," she cried, "that
you should keep me here? If my death, which I feel is near, would give
you pleasure, I pray you, kill me, it is all the kindness I dare hope
from you; but do not condemn me to pass a long and melancholy life apart
from my husband."

The Lioness only scoffed at her, and told her that the best thing she
could do was to dry her tears, and try to please her; that if she acted
otherwise, she would be the most miserable person in the world.

"What must I do then," replied the Queen, "to soften your heart?" "I am
fond of fly-pasties," said the Lioness. "You must find means of
procuring a sufficient number of flies to make me a large and
sweet-tasting one." "But," said the Queen, "I see no flies here, and
even were there any, it is not light enough to catch them; and if I were
to catch some, I have never in my life made pastry, so that you are
giving me orders which it is impossible for me to execute." "No matter,"
said the pitiless Lioness; "that which I wish to have, I will have."

The Queen made no reply: she thought to herself, in spite of the cruel
fairy, that she had but one life to lose, and in the condition in which
she then was, what was there to fear in death? Instead, therefore, of
going in search of flies, she sat herself down under a yew tree, and
began to weep and complain: "Ah, my dear husband, what grief will be
yours, when you go to the castle to fetch me, and find I am not there;
you will think that I am dead, or faithless, and I would rather that you
should mourn the loss of my life, than that of my love; perhaps someone
will find the remains of my chariot in the forest, and all the ornaments
which I took with me to please you; and when you see these, you will no
longer doubt that death has taken me; and how can I tell that you will
not give to another the heart's love which you have shared with me? But,
at least, I shall not have the pain of knowing this, since I am not to
return to the world." She would have continued communing thus with
herself for a long time, if she had not been interrupted by the dismal
croaking of a raven above her head. She lifted her eyes, and by the
feeble light saw a large raven with a frog in its bill, and about to
swallow it. "Although I see no help at hand for myself," she said, "I
will not let this poor frog perish if I can save it; it suffers as much
in its way, as I do in mine, although our conditions are so different,"
and picking up the first stick she could find, she made the raven drop
its prey. The frog fell to the ground, where it lay for a time
half-stunned, but finally recovering its froggish senses, it began to
speak, and said: "Beautiful Queen, you are the first benevolent person
that I have seen since my curiosity first brought me here." "By what
wonderful power are you enabled to speak, little Frog?" responded the
Queen, "and what kind of people do you see here? for as yet I have seen
none." "All the monsters that cover the lake," replied the little Frog,
"were once in the world: some on thrones, some in high positions at
court; there are even here some royal ladies, who caused much strife and
blood*-shed; it is they whom you see changed into leeches; their fate
condemns them to be here for a time, but none of those who come return
to the world better or wiser." "I can well understand," said the Queen,
"that many wicked people together do not help to make each other better;
but you, my little Frog friend, what are you doing here?" "It was
curiosity which led me here," she replied. "I am half a fairy, my powers
are restricted with regard to certain things, but far-reaching in
others; if the Fairy Lioness knew that I was in her dominions, she would
kill me."

"Whether fairy or half-fairy," said the Queen, "I cannot understand how
you could have fallen into the raven's clutches and been nearly eaten."
"I can explain it in a few words," replied the Frog. "When I have my
little cap of roses on my head, I fear nothing, as in that resides most
of my power; unfortunately, I had left it in the marsh, when that ugly
raven pounced upon me; if it had not been for you, madam, I should be no
more; and as you have saved my life, you have only to command, and I
will do all in my power to alleviate the sorrows of your own." "Alas!
dear Frog," said the Queen, "the wicked fairy who holds me captive
wishes me to make her a fly-pasty; but there are no flies here; if there
were any, I could not see in the dim light to catch them; I run a
chance, therefore, of being killed by her blows."

"Leave it to me," said the Frog. "I will soon get you some." Whereupon
the Frog rubbed herself over with sugar, and more than six thousand of
her frog friends did likewise; then they repaired to a place where the
fairy kept a large store of flies, for the purpose of tormenting some of
her unhappy victims. As soon as they smelt the sugar, they flew to it,
and stuck to the frogs, and these kind helpers returned at a gallop to
the Queen. There had never been such a fly-catching before, nor a better
pasty, than that the Queen made for the fairy. The latter was greatly
surprised when the Queen handed it to her, and could not imagine how she
had been clever enough to catch the flies.

The Queen, finding herself exposed to the inclemencies of the poisonous
atmosphere, cut down some cypress branches, wherewith to build herself a
hut. The Frog generously offered her services, and putting herself at
the head of all those who had gone to collect the flies, they helped the
Queen to build as pretty a little tenement as the world could show.
Scarcely, however, had she laid herself down to rest, than the monsters
of the lake, jealous of her repose, came round her hut, and nearly drove
her distracted, by setting up a noise, more hideous than any ever heard
before.

She rose in fear and trembling and fled from the house: this was exactly
what the monsters desired. A dragon, who had formerly been a tyrant of
one of the finest states of the Universe, immediately took possession of
it.

The poor Queen tried to complain of the ill-treatment, but no one would
listen to her; the monsters laughed and hooted at her, and the Fairy
Lioness told her that if she came again to deafen her with lamentations,
she would give her a sound thrashing. She was forced, therefore, to
hold her tongue, and to have recourse to the Frog, who was the kindest
body in the world. They wept together; for as soon as she put on her cap
of roses, the Frog was able to laugh or weep like anyone else. "I feel
such an affection for you," she said to the Queen, "that I will re-build
your house, even though I drive all the monsters of the lake to
despair." She immediately cut some wood, and the little rustic palace of
the Queen was so quickly reared, that she was able to sleep in it that
night. The Frog, who thought of everything that was necessary for the
Queen's comfort, made her a bed of wild thyme. When the wicked fairy
found out that the Queen did not sleep on the ground, she sent for her:
"What gods or men are they who protect you?" she asked. "This land,
watered only by showers of burning sulphur, has never produced even a
leaf of sage; I am told, nevertheless, that sweet-smelling herbs spring
up beneath your feet!"

"I cannot explain it, madam," said the Queen, "unless the cause is due
to the child I hope one day to have, who will perhaps be less unhappy
than I am."

"What I now wish for," said the fairy, "is a bunch of the rarest
flowers; see if this coming happiness you speak of will obtain these for
you. If you fail to get them, blows will not fail to follow, for these I
often give, and know well how to administer." The Queen began to cry;
such threats as these were anything but pleasant to her and she was in
despair at the thought of the impossibility of finding flowers.

She went back to her little house; her friend the Frog came to her:
"How unhappy you are!" she said to the Queen. "Alas! who would not be
so, dear friend? The fairy has ordered a bunch of the most beautiful
flowers, and where am I to find them? You see what sort of flowers grow
here; my life, nevertheless, is at stake, if I do not procure them for
her." "Dear Queen," said the Frog in tender tones, "we must try our best
to get you out of this difficulty. There lives a bat in this
neighbourhood, the only one with whom I have made acquaintance; she is a
good creature, and moves more quickly than I can; I will give her my cap
of roses, and aided by this, she will be able to find you the flowers."
The Queen made a low curtsey; for there was no possible way of embracing
the Frog. The latter went off without delay to speak to the bat; a few
hours later she returned, bearing under her wings the most exquisite
flowers. The Queen hurried off with them to the fairy, who was more
overcome by surprise than before, unable to understand in what
miraculous way the Queen received help.

Meanwhile the Queen was continually thinking by what means she could
escape. She confided her longing to the Frog, who said to her, "Madam,
allow me first to consult my little cap, and we will then arrange
matters according to its advice." She took her cap, placed it on some
straw, and then burned in front of it a few sprigs of juniper, some
capers, and two green peas; she then croaked five times, and the
ceremony being then completed, she put on her cap again, and began
speaking like an oracle. "Fate, the ruler of all things, forbids you to
leave this place. You will have a little Princess, more beautiful than
Venus herself; do not trouble yourself about anything else, time alone
can comfort you." The Queen's head drooped, a few tears fell from her
eyes, but she resolved to trust her friend: "At least," she said to her,
"do not leave me here alone; and befriend me when my little one is
born." The Frog promised to remain with her, and comforted her as best
she could.

But it is now time to return to the King. While the enemy kept him shut
up in his capital, he could not continually send messengers to the
Queen. At last, however, after several sorties, he obliged the besiegers
to retire, and he rejoiced at his success less on his own account, than
on that of the Queen, whom he could now bring back in safety. He was in
total ignorance of the disaster which had befallen her, for none of his
officers had dared to tell him of it. They had been into the forest and
found the remains of the chariot, the runaway horses, and the driving
apparel which she had put on when going to find her husband. As they
were fully persuaded that she was dead, and had been eaten by wild
beasts, their only care was to make the King believe that she had died
suddenly. On receiving this mournful intelligence, he thought he should
die himself of grief; he tore his hair, he wept many tears, and gave
vent to his bereavement in every imaginable expression of sorrow, cries,
sobs, and sighs. For some days he would see no one, nor allow himself to
be seen; he then returned to his capital, and entered on a long period
of mourning, to which the sorrow of his heart testified more sincerely
than even his sombre garments of grief. All the surrounding kings sent
their ambassadors charged with messages of condolence; and when the
ceremonies, indispensable to these occasions, were over, he granted his
subjects a period of peace, exempting them from military service, and
helping them, in every possible way, to improve their commerce.

The Queen knew nothing of all this. Meanwhile a little Princess had been
born to her, as beautiful as the Frog had predicted, to whom they gave
the name of Moufette. The Queen had great difficulty in persuading the
fairy to allow her to bring up the child, for so ferocious was she, that
she would have liked to eat it. Moufette, a wonder of beauty, was now
six months old; the Queen, as she looked upon her with a tenderness
mingled with pity, continually said: "Ah! if your father could see you,
my poor little one, how delighted he would be! how dear you would be to
him! But even, already, maybe, he has begun to forget me; he believes,
no doubt, that we are lost to him in death; and perhaps another fills
the place in his heart, that once was mine."

These sorrowful reflections caused her many tears; the Frog, who truly
loved her, seeing her cry like this, said to her one day: "If you would
like me to do so, madam, I will go and find the King, your husband; the
journey is long, and I travel but slowly; but, sooner or later, I shall
hope to arrive." This proposal could not have been more warmly received
than it was; the Queen clasped her hands, and made Moufette clasp hers
too, in sign of the gratitude she felt towards Madam Frog, for offering
to undertake the journey. She assured her that the King also would not
be ungrateful; "but," she continued, "of what use will it be to him to
know that I am in this melancholy abode; it will be impossible for him
to deliver me from it?" "Madam," replied the Frog, "we must leave that
to Heaven; we can only do that which depends on ourselves."

They said good-bye to one another; the Queen sent a message to the King,
written with her blood on a piece of rag; for she possessed neither ink
nor paper. She begged him to give attention to everything the good Frog
told him, and to believe all she said, as she was bringing him news of
herself.

The Frog was a year and four days climbing up the ten thousand steps
which lead from the dark country, in which she had left the Queen, up
into the world; it took her another year to prepare her equipage, for
she had too much pride to allow herself to appear at the Court like a
poor, common frog from the marshes. She had a little sedan-chair made,
large enough to hold two eggs comfortably; it was covered on the outside
with tortoise-shell, and lined with lizard-skin; then she chose fifty
maids of honour, these were the little green frogs which hop about the
meadows; each was mounted on a snail, furnished with a light saddle, and
rode in style with the leg thrown over the saddle-bow; several
water-rats, dressed as pages, ran before the snails, as her body-guard;
in short, nothing so pretty had ever been seen before, and to crown it
all, her cap of crimson roses, always fresh and in full bloom, suited
her in the most admirable manner. She was a bit of a coquette in her
way, so she felt obliged to add a little rouge and a few patches; some
said that she was painted as were many ladies of that country, but
inquiries into the matter proved that this report had only been spread
by her enemies.

The journey lasted seven years, during which time the poor Queen went
through unspeakable pains and suffering, and if it had not been for the
beautiful Moufette, who was a great comfort to her, she would have died
a hundred times over. This wonderful little creature could not open her
mouth or say a word, without filling her mother with delight; indeed,
everybody, with the exception of the Fairy Lioness, was enchanted with
her; at last, when the Queen had lived six years in this horrible place,
the fairy said that, provided everything she killed was given to her,
she might go hunting with her.

The joy of the Queen at once more seeing the sun may be imagined. So
unaccustomed had she grown to its light, that at first she thought it
would blind her. As for Moufette, she was so quick and intelligent, that
even at five or six years of age, she never failed to hit her mark, and
so, in this way, the mother and daughter succeeded in somewhat lessening
the ferocity of the fairy.

The Frog travelled over mountains and valleys, never stopping day or
night; at last she drew near the capital, where the King was in
residence. She was surprised to see dancing and festivity in every
direction; there was laughter and singing, and the nearer she got to
the town, the more joyous and jubilant the people seemed. Her rural
equipage caused great astonishment, everyone went after it, and so large
had the crowd become by the time she had reached the town, that she had
great difficulty in making her way to the palace. Here everything was as
magnificent as possible, for the King, who had been a widower for nine
years, had at last yielded to the prayers of his subjects, and was on
the eve of marriage with a Princess, less beautiful, it is true, than
his wife, but not the less agreeable for that.

The kind Frog, having descended from her sedan-chair, entered the royal
presence, followed by her attendants. She had no need to ask for
audience, for the King, his affianced bride, and all the princes, were
all much too curious to know the reason of her coming, to think of
interrupting her. "Sire," said she, "I hardly know if the news I bring
you will give you joy or sorrow; the marriage which you are about to
celebrate, convinces me of your infidelity to the Queen."

"Her memory is dear to me as ever," said the King, unable to prevent the
falling of a tear or two; "but you must know, kind frog, that kings are
not always able to do what they wish; for the last nine years, my
subjects have been urging me to marry; I owe them an heir to the throne,
and I have therefore chosen this young Princess, who appears to me all
that is charming." "I advise you not to marry her, for the Queen is not
dead; I bring you a letter from her, written with her own blood. A
little daughter, Moufette, has been born to you, more beautiful than
the heavens themselves." The King took the rag, on which the Queen had
scrawled a few words; he kissed it, he bathed it in his tears, he showed
it to the whole assembly, saying that he recognised his wife's
handwriting; he asked the Frog a thousand questions, which she answered
with vivacity and intelligence.

The betrothed Princess, the ambassadors who had come to be present at
the marriage, began to pull long faces. One of the most important of the
guests turned to the King, and said, "Sire, can you think of breaking so
solemn an engagement, on the word of a toad like that? This scum of the
marshes has the insolence to come and tell lies before the whole Court,
for the pleasure of being heard!" "Know, your Excellency," replied the
Frog, "that I am no scum of the marshes, and since I am forced to
exhibit my powers: Come forth, fairies all!" And thereupon all the
frogs, rats, snails, lizards, with the frog at their head, suddenly
appeared; not, however, in the usual form of these reptiles, but with
tall, majestic figures, pleasing countenances, and eyes more brilliant
than stars; each wore a jewelled crown on his head, and over his
shoulders a regal mantle of velvet, lined with ermine, with a long train
which was borne by dwarfs. At the same time was heard the sound of
trumpets, kettle-drums, hautboys, and drums, filling the air with
melodious and warlike music, and all the fairies began to dance a
ballet, their every step so light, that the slightest spring lifted them
to the vaulted ceiling of the room. The King and his future Queen,
surprised as they were at this, were no less astonished, when they saw
all these fairy ballet dancers suddenly change into flowers, jasmine,
jonquils, violets, pinks, and tube roses, which still continued to dance
as if they had legs and feet. It was like a living flower-bed, of which
every movement delighted both the eye and the sense of smell. Another
moment, and the flowers had disappeared; in their place several
fountains threw their waters into the air and fell into an artificial
lake at the foot of the castle walls; this was covered with little
painted and gilded boats, so pretty and dainty that the Princess invited
the ambassadors to go for a trip on the water. They were all pleased to
do so, thinking it was all a merry pastime, which would end happily in
the marriage festivities. But they had no sooner embarked, than the
boats, water, and fountains disappeared, and the frogs were frogs again.
The King asked what had become of the Princess; the Frog replied, "Sire,
no queen is yours, but your wife; were I less attached to her than I am,
I should not interfere; but she is so deserving, and your daughter
Moufette is so charming that you ought not to delay a moment in going to
their deliverance." "I assure you, Madam Frog," said the King, "that if
I did not believe my wife to be dead, there is nothing in the world I
would not do to see her again." "After the wonders I have shown you,"
she replied, "it seems to me that you ought to be more convinced of the
truth of what I have told you. Leave your kingdom in charge of
trustworthy men, and start without delay. Here is a ring which will
furnish you with the means of seeing the Queen, and of speaking with
the Fairy Lioness, although she is the most terrible creature in the
world."

The King departed, refusing to have anyone to accompany him, after
making handsome presents to the Frog: "Do not be discouraged," she said
to him; "you will meet with terrible difficulties, but I hope that you
will succeed according to your wishes." Somewhat comforted by her words,
the King started in search of his dear wife, with no other guide than
his ring.

As Moufette grew older, her beauty became more perfect, and all the
monsters of the quicksilver lake fell in love with her; and the dragons,
with their hideous and terrifying forms, came and lay at her feet.
Although Moufette had seen them ever since she was born, her beautiful
eyes could not accustom themselves to the sight of these creatures, and
she would run away and hide in her mother's arms. "Shall we remain here
long?" she asked her; "is there to be no end to our misery?" The Queen
spoke hopefully in order to cheer her child, but in her heart she had no
hope; the absence of the Frog, her unbroken silence, the long time that
had elapsed since she had news of the King, all these things filled her
with sorrow and despair.

The Fairy Lioness had gradually made it a practice to take them with her
hunting. She was fond of good things, and liked the game they killed for
her, and although all they got in return was the gift of the head or the
feet, it was something to be allowed to see again the light of day. The
fairy took the form of a lioness, the Queen and her daughter seated
themselves on her back, and thus they went hunting through the forests.

The King happened to be resting in a forest one day, whither his ring
had guided him, and saw them pass like an arrow shot from the bow; he
was unseen of them, and when he tried to follow them, they vanished
completely from his sight. Notwithstanding the constant trouble she had
been in, the Queen still preserved her former beauty; she appeared to
her husband more charming than ever. He longed for her to return to him,
and feeling sure that the young Princess who was with her was his dear
little Moufette, he determined to face a thousand deaths, rather than
abandon his design of rescuing her.

By the help of his ring, he found his way into the obscure region where
the Queen had been so many years; he was not a little surprised when he
found himself descending to the centre of the earth, but every fresh
thing he saw astonished him more and more. The Fairy Lioness, who knew
everything, was aware of the day and the hour when he would arrive; she
would have given a great deal if the powers in league with her had
ordained otherwise; but she determined at least to oppose his strength
with the full might of her own.

She built a palace of crystal, which floated in the centre of the lake
of quicksilver, and rose and fell with its waves. In it she imprisoned
the Queen and her daughter, and then harangued all the monsters who were
in love with Moufette. "You will lose this beautiful Princess," she said
to them, "if you do not help me to protect her from a knight who has
come to carry her away." The monsters promised to leave nothing in their
power undone; they surrounded the palace of crystal; the lightest in
weight took their stations on the roof and walls; the others kept guard
at the doors, and the remainder in the lake.

The King, advised by his faithful ring, went first to the Fairy's Cave;
she was awaiting him in her form of lioness. As soon as he appeared she
threw herself upon him; but he handled his sword with a valour for which
she was not prepared, and as she was putting out one of her paws to fell
him to the earth, he cut it off at the joint just where the elbow comes.
She uttered a loud cry and fell over; he went up to her, put his foot on
her throat and swore that he would kill her, and in spite of her
ungovernable fury and invulnerability, she felt a little afraid. "What
do you wish to do with me?" she asked. "What do you want of me?" "I wish
to punish you," he replied proudly, "for having carried away my wife,
and you shall give her up to me or I will strangle you on the spot."
"Look towards the lake," she said, "and see if I have the power to do
so." The King turned in the direction towards which she pointed, and saw
the Queen and her daughter in the palace of crystal, which was floating
like a vessel, without oars or rudder, on the lake of quicksilver. He
was ready to die with mingled joy and sorrow; he called to them with all
his might, and they heard him, but how was he to reach them? While
thinking over the means by which he might accomplish this, the Fairy
Lioness disappeared. He ran round and round the lake, but whenever the
palace came close enough to him, on one side or the other, for him to
spring upon it, it suddenly floated away again with terrible swiftness,
and so his hopes were continually disappointed. The Queen, fearing he
would at length grow weary, called to him not to lose courage, that the
Fairy Lioness wanted to tire him out, but that true love knew how to
face all difficulties. She and Moufette then stretched out their hands
towards him with imploring gestures. Seeing this, the King was filled
with renewed courage, and raising his voice, he said that he would
rather pass the remainder of his life in this melancholy region than go
away without them. He needed great patience, for no king on earth ever
spent such a wretched time before. He had only the ground, covered with
briars and thorns, for his bed; his food consisted of wild fruits, more
bitter than gall, and he was incessantly engaged in defending himself
from the monsters of the lake.

Three years passed in this manner, and the King could not flatter
himself that he had gained the least advantage; he was almost in
despair, and over and over again was tempted to throw himself in the
lake, and he would certainly have done so if he could have thought that
by such a deed he might alleviate the sufferings of the Queen and the
Princess. He was running one day as usual, first to one side of the lake
then to the other, when one of the most hideous of the dragons called
him, and said to him: "If you will swear to me by your crown and
sceptre, by your royal mantle, by your wife and child, to give me,
whenever I shall ask for it, a certain delicate morsel to eat, for which
I have a taste, I will take you on my back, and I promise you that none
of the monsters of this lake, who guard the palace, shall prevent us
from carrying off the Queen and Princess Moufette."

"Ah! my beloved Dragon!" cried the King, "I swear to you, and to all the
family of dragons, that I will give you your fill to eat of what you
like, and will for ever remain your humble servant." "Do not make any
promises," replied the Dragon, "if you have any thought of not
fulfilling them; for, in that case, misfortunes will fall upon you that
you will not forget as long as you live." The King renewed his
protestations; he was dying of impatience to get possession of his dear
Queen. He mounted on the Dragon's back, as if it was the finest horse in
the world, but the other monsters now advanced to bar his passage. They
fought together, nothing was to be heard but the sharp hissings of the
serpents, nothing to be seen but fire, and sulphur, and saltpetre,
falling in every direction. At last the King reached the palace, but
here his efforts had to be renewed, for the entrances were defended by
bats, owls, and ravens; however, the Dragon, with his claws, his teeth
and tail, cut to pieces even the boldest of these. The Queen, on her
side, who was looking on at this fierce encounter, kicked away pieces of
the wall, and armed herself with these to help her dear husband. They
were at last victorious; they ran into one another's arms, and the work
of disenchantment was completed by a thunderbolt, which fell into the
lake and dried it up.

The friendly Dragon had disappeared with all the other monsters, and the
King, by what means he could not guess, found himself again in his own
capital, seated, with his Queen and Moufette, in a magnificent
dining-hall, with a table spread with exquisite meats in front of them.
Such joy and astonishment as theirs were unknown before. All their
subjects ran in to see the Queen and the young Princess, who, to add to
the wonder of it all, was so superbly dressed, that the eye could hardly
bear to look upon her dazzling jewels.

It is easy to imagine the festivities that now went on at the castle;
masquerades, running at the ring, and tournaments attracted the greatest
princes in the world; but even more were they attracted by the bright
eyes of Moufette. Among those who were the handsomest and most
accomplished in feats of arms, Prince Moufy everywhere was the most
conspicuous. He was universally admired and applauded, and Moufette, who
hitherto had been only in the company of dragons and serpents, did not
withhold her share of praise. No day passed but Prince Moufy showed her
some fresh attention, in the hope of pleasing her, for he loved her
deeply; and having offered himself as a suitor, he made known to the
King and Queen, that his principality was of a beauty and extent that
deserved their special attention.

The King replied that Moufette was at liberty to choose a husband, and
that he only wished to please her and make her happy. The Prince was
delighted with this answer, and having already become aware that he was
not indifferent to the Princess, offered her his hand. She assured him
that if he was not her husband, no other man should be, and Moufy,
overcome with joy, threw himself at her feet, and in affectionate terms
begged her to remember the promise she had given him. The Prince and
Princess were betrothed, and Prince Moufy then returned to his
principality to make preparations for the marriage. Moufette shed many
tears at his departure, for she was troubled with a presentiment of evil
which she could not explain. The Queen, seeing that the Prince was also
overcome with sorrow, gave him the portrait of her daughter, and begged
him rather to lessen the magnificence of the preparations than to delay
his return. The Prince, only too ready to obey such a command, promised
to comply with what would be for his own happiness.

The Princess occupied herself during his absence with her music, for she
had, in a few months, learnt to play well. One day, when she was in the
Queen's room, the King rushed in, his face bathed in tears, and taking
his daughter in his arms: "Alas, my child," he cried. "Alas! wretched
father, unhappy King!" He could say no more, for his voice was stifled
with sobs. The Queen and Princess, in great alarm, asked him what was
the matter, and at last he was able to tell them that a giant of an
enormous height, who gave himself out to be an ambassador from the
Dragon of the lake, had just arrived; that in accordance with the
promise, made by the King in return for the help he had received in
fighting the monsters, the Dragon demanded him to give up the Princess,
as he wished to make her into a pie for his dinner; the King added that
he had bound himself by solemn oaths to give him what he asked, and in
those days no one ever broke his word.

When the Queen heard this dreadful news, she uttered piercing cries, and
clasped her child to her breast. "My life shall be taken," she said,
"before my daughter shall be delivered up to that monster; let him
rather take our kingdom and all that we possess. Unnatural father! can
you possibly consent to such a cruel thing? What! my child made into a
pie! The thought of it is intolerable! Send me this terrible ambassador,
maybe the sight of my anguish may touch his heart."

The King made no reply, but went in search of the giant and brought him
to the Queen, who threw herself at his feet. She and her daughter
implored him to have mercy upon them, and to persuade the Dragon to take
everything they possessed, and to spare Moufette's life; but the giant
replied that the matter did not rest with him, and that the Dragon was
so obstinate and so fond of good things, that all the powers combined
would not prevent him eating whatever he had taken into his head he
would like for a meal. He further advised them, as a friend, to consent
with a good grace, as otherwise greater evils might arise. At these
words the Queen fainted, and the Princess, had she not been obliged to
go to her mother's assistance, would have done the same.

No sooner was the sad news spread through the palace, than the whole
town knew it. Nothing was heard but weeping and wailing, for Moufette
was greatly beloved. The King could not make up his mind to give her to
the giant, and the giant, who had already waited some days, began to
grow impatient, and to utter terrible threats. The King and Queen,
however, said to each other, "What worse thing could happen to us? If
the Dragon of the lake were to come and devour us all we could not be
more distressed; if Moufette is put into a pie, we are lost."

The giant now told them that he had received a message from his master,
and that if the Princess would agree to marry a nephew of his, the
Dragon would let her live; that the nephew was young and handsome; that,
moreover, he was a Prince, and that she would be able to live with him
very happily. This proposal somewhat lessened their grief; the Queen
spoke to the Princess, but found her still more averse to this marriage
than to the thought of death. "I cannot save my life by being
unfaithful," said Moufette. "You promised me to Prince Moufy, and I will
marry no one else; let me die; my death will ensure the peace of your
lives." The King then came and endeavoured with all the tenderest of
expressions to persuade her; but nothing moved her, and finally it was
decided that she should be conducted to the summit of a mountain, and
there await the Dragon.

Everything was prepared for this great sacrifice; nothing so mournful
had before been seen; nothing to be met anywhere but black garments, and
pale and horrified faces. Four hundred maidens of the highest rank,
dressed in long white robes, and crowned with cypress, accompanied the
Princess, who was carried in an open litter of black velvet, that all
might look on this masterpiece of beauty. Her hair, tied with crape,
hung over her shoulders, and she wore a crown of jasmine, mingled with a
few marigolds. The grief of the King and Queen, who followed, overcome
by their deep sorrow, appeared the only thing that moved her. The giant,
armed from head to foot, marched beside the litter, and looked with
hungry eye at the Princess, as if anticipating his share of her when she
came to be eaten; the air resounded with sighs and sobs, and the road
was flooded with the tears of the onlookers.

"Ah! Frog, Frog," cried the Queen, "you have indeed forsaken me! Alas!
why did you give me help in that unhappy region, and now withhold it
from me! Would that I had then died, I should not now be lamenting the
loss of all my hopes, I should not now have the anguish of seeing my
dear Moufette on the point of being devoured!" The procession meanwhile
was slowly advancing, and at last reached the summit of the fatal
mountain. Here the cries and lamentations were redoubled, nothing more
piteous had before been heard. The giant ordered everyone to say
farewell and to retire, and they all obeyed him, for in those days,
people were very simple and submissive, and never sought for a remedy in
their misfortunes.

The King and Queen, and all the Court, now ascended another mountain,
whence they could see all that happened to the Princess: and they had
not to wait long, before they saw a Dragon, half a league long, coming
through the air. His body was so heavy that, notwithstanding his six
large wings, he was hardly able to fly; he was covered with immense blue
scales, and poisonous tongues of flame; his tail was twisted into as
many as fifty and a half coils; each of his claws was the size of a
windmill, and three rows of teeth, as long as those of an elephant,
could be seen inside his wide-open jaw. As the Dragon slowly made his
way towards the mountain, the good, faithful Frog, mounted on the back
of a hawk, flew rapidly to Prince Moufy. She wore her cap of roses, and
although he was locked into his private room, she entered without a key,
and said, "What are you doing here, unhappy lover? You sit dreaming of
Moufette's beauty, and at this very moment she is exposed to the most
frightful danger; here is a rose-leaf, by blowing

upon it, I can change it into a superb horse, as you will see."

There immediately appeared a horse, green in colour, and with twelve
hoofs and three heads, of which one emitted fire, another bomb-shells,
and the third cannon-balls. She gave the Prince a sword, eight yards
long, and lighter than a feather. She clothed him with a single diamond,
which he put on like a coat, and which, although as hard as a rock, was
so pliable that he could move in it at his ease. "Go," she said, "run,
fly to the rescue of her whom you love; the green horse I have given
you, will take you to her, and when you have delivered her, let her know
the share I have had in the matter."

"Generous fairy," cried the Prince, "I cannot at this moment show you
all my gratitude; but from henceforth, I am your faithful servitor."

He mounted the horse with the three heads, which instantly galloped off
on its twelve hoofs, and went at a greater rate than three of the best
ordinary horses, so that in a very little time the Prince reached the
mountain, when he found his dear Princess all alone, and saw the Dragon
slowly drawing near. The green horse immediately began to send forth
fire, bomb-shells, and cannon-balls, which not a little astonished the
monster; he received twenty balls in his throat, and his scales were
somewhat damaged, and the bomb-shells put out one of his eyes. He grew
furious, and made as if to throw himself on the Prince; but his long
sword was so finely-tempered, that he could use it as he liked,
thrusting it in at times up to the hilt, and at others using it like a
whip. The Prince, on his side, would have suffered from the Dragon's
claws, had it not been for his diamond coat, which was impenetrable.

Moufette had recognised her lover a long way off, for the diamond that
covered him was transparent and bright, and she was seized with mortal
terror at the danger he was in. The King and Queen, however, were filled
with renewed hope, for it was such an unexpected thing to see a horse
with three heads and twelve hoofs, sending forth fire and flame, and a
Prince in a diamond suit and armed with a formidable sword, arrive at
such an opportune moment, and fight with so much valour. The King put
his hat on the top of his stick, and the Queen tied her handkerchief to
the end of another, as signals of encouragement to the Prince; and all
their Court followed suit. As a fact, this was not necessary, for his
own heart and the peril in which he saw Moufette, were sufficient to
animate his courage. And what efforts did he not make! the ground was
covered with stings, claws, horns, wings, and scales of the Dragon; the
earth was coloured blue and green with the mingled blood of the Dragon
and the horse. Five times the Prince fell to the ground, but each time
he rose again and leisurely mounted his horse, and then there were
cannonades, and rushing of flames, and explosions, such as were never
heard or seen before. The Dragon's strength at last gave way, and he
fell; the Prince gave him a final blow, and nobody could believe their
eyes, when from this last great wound, there stepped forth a handsome
and charming prince, in a coat of blue and gold velvet, embroidered with
pearls, while on his head he wore a little Grecian helmet, shaded with
white feathers. He rushed, his arms outspread, towards Prince Moufy, and
embraced him. "What do I not owe you, valiant liberator?" he cried. "You
have delivered me from a worse prison than ever before enclosed a king;
I have languished there since, sixteen years ago, the Fairy Lioness
condemned me to it; and, such was her power, that she would have forced
me, against my will, to devour that adorable Princess; lead me to her
feet, that I may explain to her my misfortune."

Prince Moufy, surprised and delighted at this extraordinary termination
to his adventure, showered civilities on the newly-found Prince. They
hastened to rejoin Moufette, who thanked Heaven a thousand times for her
unhoped-for happiness. The King, the Queen, and all the Court, were
already with her; everybody spoke at once, nobody listened to anybody
else, and they all shed nearly as many tears of joy as they had before
of grief. Finally, that nothing might be wanting to complete their
rejoicing, the good Frog appeared, flying through the air on her hawk,
which had little bells of gold on its feet. When the tinkle, tinkle, of
these was heard, everyone looked up, and saw the cap of roses shining
like the sun, and the Frog as beautiful as the dawn.

The Queen ran towards her, and took her by one of her little paws, and
in the same moment, the wise Frog became a great Queen, with a charming
countenance. "I come," she cried, "to crown the faithful Moufette, who
preferred to risk her life, rather than be untrue to Prince Moufy." She
thereupon took two myrtle wreaths, and placed them on the heads of the
lovers, and giving three taps with her wand, all the Dragon's bones
formed themselves into a triumphal arch, in commemoration of the great
event which had just taken place.

They all wended their way back to the town, singing wedding songs, as
gaily as they had before mournfully bewailed the sacrifice of the
Princess. The marriage took place the following day, and the joy with
which it was celebrated may be imagined.




PRINCESS ROSETTE


Once upon a time there lived a King and Queen who had two handsome boys;
so well-fed and hearty were they, that they grew like the day.

Whenever the Queen had a child, she sent for the fairies, that she might
learn from them what would be its future lot. After a while she had a
little daughter, who was so beautiful, that no one could see her without
loving her. The fairies came as usual, and the Queen having feasted
them, said to them as they were going away, "Do not forget that good
custom of yours, but tell me what will happen to Rosette"--for this was
the name of the little Princess. The fairies answered her that they had
left their divining-books at home, and that they would come again to see
her. "Ah!" said the Queen, "that bodes no good, I fear; you do not wish
to distress me by foretelling evil; but, I pray you, let me know the
worst, and hide nothing from me." The fairies continued to make excuses,
but the Queen only became more anxious to know the truth. At last the
chief among them said to her, "We fear, madam, that Rosette will be the
cause of a great misfortune befalling her brothers; that they may even
lose their lives on her account. This is all that we can tell you of
the fate of this sweet little Princess, and we are grieved to have
nothing better to say about her." The fairies took their departure, and
the Queen was very sorrowful, so sorrowful that the King saw by her face
that she was in trouble. He asked her what was the matter. She told him
she had gone too near the fire and accidentally burnt all the flax that
was on her distaff. "Is that all?" replied the King, and he went up to
his store-room and brought her down more flax than she could spin in a
hundred years.

But the Queen was still very sorrowful, and the King again asked her
what was the matter. She told him that she had been down to the river
and had let one of her green satin slippers fall into the water. "Is
that all?" replied the King, and he sent for all the shoemakers in the
kingdom, and made the Queen a present of ten thousand green satin
slippers.

Still the Queen was no less sorrowful; the King asked her once more what
was the matter. She told him that, being hungry, she had eaten hastily,
and had swallowed her wedding-ring. The King knew that she was not
speaking the truth, for he had himself put away the ring, and he
replied, "My dear wife, you are not speaking the truth; here is your
ring, which I have kept in my purse." The Queen was put out of
countenance at being caught telling a lie--for there is nothing in the
world so ugly--and she saw that the King was vexed, so she told him what
the fairies had predicted about little Rosette, and begged him to tell
her if he could think of any remedy. The King was greatly troubled, so
much so, that at last he said to the Queen, "I see no way of saving our
two boys, except by putting the little girl to death, while she is still
in her swaddling clothes." But the Queen cried that she would rather
suffer death herself, that she would never consent to so cruel a deed,
and that the King must try and think of some other remedy. The King and
Queen could think of nothing else, and while thus pondering over the
matter, the Queen was told that in a large wood near the town, there
lived an old hermit, who made his home in the trunk of a tree, whom
people went from far and near to consult.

"It is to him I must go," said the Queen; "the fairies told me the evil,
but they forgot to tell me the remedy."

She started early in the morning, mounted on her little white mule, that
was shod with gold, and accompanied by two of her maids of honour, who
each rode a pretty horse. When they were near the wood they dismounted
out of respect, and made their way to the tree where the hermit lived.
He did not much care for the visits of women, but when he saw that it
was the Queen approaching, he said, "Welcome! what would you ask of me?"
She related to him what the fairies had said about Rosette, and asked
him to advise her what to do. He told her that the Princess must be shut
up in a tower, and not be allowed to leave it as long as she lived. The
Queen thanked him, and returned and told everything to the King. The
King immediately gave orders for a large tower to be built as quickly as
possible. In it he placed his daughter, but that she might not feel
lonely and depressed, he, and the Queen, and her two brothers, went to
see her every day. The elder of these was called the big Prince, and the
younger, the little Prince. They loved their sister passionately, for
she was the most beautiful and graceful Princess ever seen, and the
least glance of hers was worth more than a hundred gold pieces. When she
was fifteen years old, the big Prince said to the King, "Father, my
sister is old enough to be married; shall we not soon have a wedding?"
The little Prince said the same to the Queen, but their Majesties
laughed and changed the subject, and made no answer about the marriage.

Now, it happened that the King and Queen both fell very ill, and died
within a few days of one another. There was great mourning; everyone
wore black, and all the bells were tolled. Rosette was inconsolable at
the loss of her good mother.

As soon as the funeral was over, the dukes and marquises of the kingdom
placed the big Prince on a throne made of gold and diamonds; he wore a
splendid crown on his head, and robes of violet velvet embroidered with
suns and moons. Then the whole Court cried out, "Long live the King!"
and now on all sides there was nothing but rejoicing.

Then the young King and his brother said one to another, "Now that we
are the masters, we will release our sister from the tower, where she
has been shut up for such a long and dreary time." They had only to pass
through the garden to reach the tower, which stood in one corner of it,
and had been built as high as was possible, for the late King and Queen
had intended her to remain there always. Rosette was embroidering a
beautiful dress on a frame in front of her, when she saw her brothers
enter. She rose, and taking the King's hand, said, "Good-day, sire, you
are now King, and I am your humble subject; I pray you to release me
from this tower, where I lead a melancholy life," and with this, she
burst into tears. The King embraced her, and begged her not to weep, for
he was come, he said, to take her from the tower, and to conduct her to
a beautiful castle. The Prince had his pockets full of sweetmeats, which
he gave Rosette. "Come," he said, "let us get away from this wretched
place; the King will soon find you a husband; do not be unhappy any
longer."

When Rosette saw the beautiful garden, full of flowers, and fruits, and
fountains, she was so overcome with astonishment, that she stood
speechless, for she had never seen anything of the kind before. She
looked around her, she went first here, then there, she picked the fruit
off the trees, and gathered flowers from the beds; while her little dog,
Fretillon, who was as green as a parrot, kept on running before her,
saying, yap, yap, yap! and jumping and cutting a thousand capers, and
everybody was amused at his ways. Presently he ran into a little wood,
whither the Princess followed him, and here her wonder was even greater
than before, when she saw a large peacock spreading out its tail. She
thought it so beautiful, so very beautiful, that she could not take her
eyes off it. The King and the Prince now joined her, and asked her what
delighted her so much. She pointed to the peacock, and asked them what
it was. They told her it was a bird, which was sometimes eaten. "What!"
she cried, "dare to kill and eat a beautiful bird like that! I tell you,
that I will marry no one but the King of the Peacocks, and when I am
their Queen I shall not allow anybody to eat them." The astonishment of
the King cannot be described. "But, dear sister," said he, "where would
you have us go to find the King of the Peacocks?" "Whither you please,
sire; but him, and him alone, will I marry."

Having come to this decision, she was now conducted by her brothers to
their castle; the peacock had to be brought and put into her room, so
fond was she of it. All the Court ladies who had not before seen Rosette
now hastened to greet her, and pay their respects to her. Some brought
preserves with them, some sugar, and others dresses of woven gold,
beautiful ribbons, dolls, embroidered shoes, pearls, and diamonds.
Everyone did their best to entertain her, and she was so well brought
up, so courteous, kissing their hands, curtseying when anything
beautiful was given to her, that there was not a lord or lady who did
not leave her presence gratified and charmed. While she was thus
occupied, the King and the Prince were turning over in their minds how
they should find the King of the Peacocks, if there was such a person in
the world to be found. They decided that they would have Rosette's
portrait painted; and when completed it was so life-like, that only
speech was wanting. Then they said to her, "Since you will marry no one
but the King of the Peacocks, we are going together to look for him, and
will traverse the whole world to try and find him for you. If we find
him, we shall be very glad. Meanwhile take care of our kingdom until we
return."

Rosette thanked them for all the trouble they were taking; she promised
to govern the kingdom well, and said that, during their absence, her
only pleasure would be in looking at the peacock, and making her little
dog dance. They all three cried when they said good-bye to each other.

So the two Princes started on their long journey, and they asked
everyone whom they met, "Do you know the King of the Peacocks?" but the
reply was always the same, "No, we do not." Each time they passed on and
went further, and in this way they travelled so very, very far, that no
one had ever been so far before.

They came to the kingdom of the cock-chafers; and these were in such
numbers, and made such a loud buzzing, that the King feared he should
become deaf. He asked one of them, who appeared to him to have the most
intelligence, whether he knew where the King of the Peacocks was to be
found. "Sire," replied the cock-chafer, "his kingdom lies thirty
thousand leagues from here; you have chosen the longest way to reach
it." "And how do you know that?" asked the King. "Because," answered the
cock-chafer, "we know you very well, for every year we spend two or
three months in your gardens." Whereupon the King and his brother
embraced the cock-chafer, and they went off arm in arm to dine together,
and the two strangers admired all the curiosities of that new country,
where the smallest leaf of a tree was worth a gold piece. After that,
they continued their journey, and having been directed along the right
way, they were not long in reaching its close. On their arrival, they
found all the trees laden with peacocks, and, indeed, there were
peacocks everywhere, so that they could be heard talking and screaming
two leagues off.

The King said to his brother "If the King of the Peacocks is a peacock
himself, how can our sister marry him? it would be folly to consent to
such a thing, and it would be a fine thing for us to have little
peacocks for nephews." The Prince was equally disturbed at the thought.
"It is an unhappy fancy she has taken into her head," he said. "I cannot
think what led her to imagine that there was such a person in the world
as the King of the Peacocks."

When they entered the town, they saw that it was full of men and women,
and that they all wore clothes made of peacocks' feathers, and that
these were evidently considered fine things, for every place was covered
with them. They met the King, who was driving in a beautiful little
carriage of gold, studded with diamonds, and drawn by twelve peacocks at
full gallop. This King of the Peacocks was so handsome, that the King
and the Prince were delighted; he had long, light, curly hair, fair
complexion, and wore a crown of peacocks' feathers. Directly he saw
them, he guessed, seeing that they wore a different costume to the
people of the country, that they were strangers, and wishing to
ascertain if this was so, he ordered his carriage to stop, and sent for
them.

[Illustration: '_Oh, you are jesting;_' _replied the King of the
Peacocks._ _Princess Rosette_]

The King and the Prince advanced, bowing low, and said, "Sire, we have
come from afar, to show you a portrait." They drew forth Rosette's
portrait and showed it to him. After gazing at it a while, the King of
the Peacocks said, "I can scarcely believe that there is so beautiful a
maiden in the whole world." "She is a thousand times more beautiful,"
said the King. "You are jesting," replied the King of the Peacocks.
"Sire," rejoined the Prince, "here is my brother, who is a King, like
yourself; he is called King, and my name is Prince; our sister, of whom
this is the portrait, is the Princess Rosette. We have come to ask if
you will marry her; she is good and beautiful, and we will give her, as
dower, a bushel of golden crowns." "It is well," said the King. "I will
gladly marry her; she shall want for nothing, and I shall love her
greatly; but I require that she shall be as beautiful as her portrait,
and if she is in the smallest degree less so, I shall make you pay for
it with your lives." "We consent willingly," said both Rosette's
brothers. "You consent?" added the King. "You will go to prison then,
and remain there until the Princess arrives." The Princes made no
difficulty about this, for they knew well that Rosette was more
beautiful than her portrait. They were well looked after while in
prison, and were well served with all they required, and the King often
went to see them. He kept Rosette's portrait in his room, and could
scarcely rest day or night for looking at it. As the King and his
brother could not go to her themselves, they wrote to Rosette, telling
her to pack up as quickly as possible, and to start without delay, as
the King of the Peacocks was awaiting her. They did not tell her that
they were prisoners, for fear of causing her uneasiness.

The Princess scarcely knew how to contain herself with joy, when she
received this message. She told everybody that the King of the Peacocks
had been found, and that he wanted to marry her. Bonfires were lit, and
guns fired, and quantities of sweetmeats and sugar were eaten; everyone
who came to see the Princess, during the three days before her
departure, was given bread-and-butter and jam, rolled wafers, and negus.
After having thus dispensed hospitality to her visitors, she presented
her beautiful dolls to her best friends, and handed over the government
to the wisest elders of the town, begging them to look well after
everything, to spend little, and to save up money for the King on his
return. She also prayed them to take care of her peacock, for with her
she only took her nurse, and her foster-sister, and her little green
dog, Fretillon. They set out in a boat on the sea, carrying with them
the bushel of golden crowns, and sufficient clothes for two changes a
day for ten years. They made merry on their voyage, laughing and
singing, and the nurse kept on asking the boatman if they were nearing
the Kingdom of the Peacocks; for a long time, all he said was, "No, no,
not yet." Then at last, when she asked again, "Are we anywhere near it
now?" he answered, "We shall soon be there, very soon." Once more she
said, "Are we near, are we anywhere near it now?" and he said, "Yes, we
are now within reach of shore." On hearing this, the nurse went to the
end of the boat, and sitting down beside the boatman, said to him, "If
you like, you can be rich for the remainder of your life." He replied,
"I should like nothing better." She continued, "If you like, you can
earn good money." "That would suit me very well," he answered. "Well,"
she went on, "then to-night, when the Princess is asleep, you must help
me throw her into the sea. After she is drowned, I will dress my
daughter in her fine clothes, and we will take her to the King of the
Peacocks, who will only be too pleased to marry her; and as a reward to
you, we will give you as many diamonds as you care to possess." The
boatman was very much astonished at this proposal; he told the nurse
that it was a pity to drown such a pretty Princess, and that he felt
compassion for her; but the nurse fetched a bottle of wine and made him
drink so much, that he had no longer any power to refuse.

Night having come, the Princess went to bed as usual, her little
Fretillon lying at her feet, not even stirring one of his paws. Rosette
slept soundly, but the wicked nurse kept awake, and went presently to
fetch the boatman. She took him into the Princess's room, and together
they lifted her up, feather bed, mattress, sheets, coverlet, and all,
and threw them into the sea, the Princess all the while so fast
asleep, that she never woke. But fortunately, her bed was made of
Phoenix-feathers, which are extremely rare, and have the property of
always floating on water; so that she was carried along in her bed as in
a boat. The water, however, began gradually first to wet her feather
bed, then her mattress, and Rosette began to feel uncomfortable, and
turned from side to side, and then Fretillon woke up. He had a capital
nose, and when he smelt the soles and cod-fish so near, he started
barking at them, and this awoke all the other fish, who began swimming
about. The bigger ones ran against the Princess's bed, which, not being
attached to anything, span round and round like a whirligig. Rosette
could not make out what was happening. "Is our boat having a dance on
the water?" she said. "I am not accustomed to feeling so uneasy as I am
to-night," and all the while Fretillon continued barking, and going on
as if he was out of his mind. The wicked nurse and the boatman heard him
from afar, and said: "There's that funny little beast drinking our
healths with his mistress. Let us make haste to land," for they were now
just opposite the town of the King of the Peacocks.

He had sent down a hundred chariots to the landing-place; they were
drawn by all kinds of rare animals, lions, bears, stags, wolves, horses,
oxen, asses, eagles, and peacocks: and the chariot which was intended
for the Princess was harnessed with six blue monkeys, that could jump,
dance on the tight rope, and do endless clever tricks; they had
beautiful trappings of crimson velvet, overlaid with plates of gold.
Sixty young maids of honour were also in attendance, who had been chosen
by the King for the amusement of the Princess; they were dressed in all
sorts of colours, and gold and silver were the least precious of their
adornments.

The nurse had taken great pains to dress her daughter finely; she had
put on her Rosette's best robe, and decked her all over from head to
foot with the Princess's diamonds; but with all this, she was still as
ugly as an ape, with greasy black hair, crooked eyes, bowed legs, and a
hump on her back; and, added to these deformities, she was besides of a
disagreeable and sulky temper, and was always grumbling.

When the people saw her get out of the boat, they were so taken aback by
her appearance, that they could not utter a sound. "What is the meaning
of this?" she said. "Are you all asleep? Be off, and bring me something
to eat! A nice set of beggars you are! I will have you all hanged." When
they heard this, they murmured, "What an ugly creature! and she is as
wicked as she is ugly! A nice wife for our King; well, we are not
surprised! but it was scarcely worth the trouble to bring her from the
other side of the world." Meanwhile she still behaved as if she were
already mistress of all and everything, and for no reason at all, boxed
their ears, or gave a blow with her fist to everybody in turn.

As her escort was a very large one, the procession moved slowly, and she
sat up in her chariot like a queen; but all the peacocks, who had
stationed themselves on the trees, so as to salute her as she passed,
and who had been prepared to shout, "Long live the beautiful Queen
Rosette!" could only call out, "Fie, fie, how ugly she is!" as soon as
they caught sight of her. She was so enraged at this, that she called to
her guards, "Kill those rascally peacocks who are insulting me." But the
peacocks quickly flew away, and only laughed at her.

The treacherous boatman, seeing and hearing all this, said in a low
voice to the nurse, "There is something wrong, good mother; your
daughter should have been better looking." She answered, "Hold your
tongue, stupid, or you will bring us into trouble."

The King had word brought him that the Princess was approaching. "Well,"
he said, "have her brothers, I wonder, told me the truth? Is she more
beautiful than her portrait?" "Sire," said those near him, "there will
be nothing to wish for, if she is as beautiful." "You are right,"
replied the King, "I shall be well content with that. Come, let us go
and see her," for he knew by the hubbub in the courtyard that she had
arrived. He could not distinguish anything that was said, except, "Fie,
fie, how ugly she is!" and he imagined that the people were calling out
about some little dwarf or animal that she had brought with her, for it
never entered his head that the words were applied to the Princess
herself.

Rosette's portrait was carried uncovered, at the top of a long pole,
and the King walked after it in solemn state, with all his nobles and
his peacocks, followed by ambassadors from various kingdoms. The King of
the Peacocks was very impatient to see his dear Rosette; but when he did
see her--well, he very nearly died on the spot. He flew into a violent
rage, he tore his clothes, he would not go near her, he felt quite
afraid of her. "What!" he cried, "have those two villains I have in
prison had the boldness and impudence to make a laughing-stock of me,
and to propose my marrying such a fright as that? They shall both be
killed; and let that insolent woman, and the nurse, and the man who is
with them, be immediately carried to the dungeon of my great tower, and
there kept." While this was going on, the King and his brother, who knew
that his sister was expected, had put on their bravest apparel ready to
receive her; but instead of seeing their prison door open and being set
at liberty, as they had hoped, the gaoler came with a body of soldiers
and made them go down into a dark cellar, full of horrible reptiles, and
where the water was up to their necks; no one was ever more surprised or
distressed than they were. "Alas!" they said to one another, "this is
indeed a melancholy marriage feast for us! What can have happened that
we should be so ill-treated?" They did not know what in the world to
think, except that they were to be killed, and they were very sorrowful
about this. Three days passed, and no news reached them of any kind. At
the end of that time, the King of the Peacocks came, and began calling
out insulting things to them through a hole in the wall. "You called
yourselves King and Prince, that I might fall into your trap, and engage
myself to marry your sister; but you are nothing better than two
beggars, who are not worth the water you drink. I am going to bring you
before the judges, who will soon pass their verdict upon you; the rope
to hang you with is already being made." "King of the Peacocks," replied
the King, angrily, "do not act too rashly in this matter, or you may
repent it. I am a King as well as you, and I have a fine kingdom, and
rich clothing, and crowns, to say nothing of good gold pieces. You must
be joking to talk like this of hanging us; have we stolen anything from
you?"

When the King heard him speak so boldly, he did not know what to think,
and he felt half inclined to let them and their sister go without
putting them to death; but his chief adviser, who was an arrant
flatterer, dissuaded him from this, telling him that if he did not
revenge the insult that had been put upon him, all the world would make
fun of him, and look upon him as nothing better than a miserable little
King worth a few coppers a day. The King thereupon swore that he would
never forgive them, and ordered them to be brought to trial at once.
This did not take long; the judges had only to look at the real
Rosette's portrait and then at the Princess who had arrived, and,
without hesitation, they ordered the prisoners' heads to be cut off as a
punishment for having lied to the King, since they had promised him a
beautiful Princess, and had only given him an ugly peasant girl. They
repaired with great ceremony to the prison to read this sentence to
them; but the prisoners declared that they had not lied, that their
sister was a Princess, and more beautiful than the day; that there must
be something under this which they did not understand, and they asked
for a respite of seven days, as before that time had expired their
innocence might have been established. The King of the Peacocks, who had
worked himself up to a high pitch of anger, could with great difficulty
be induced to accord them this grace, but at last he consented.

While these things were going on at the Court, we must say something
about poor Rosette. Both she and Fretillon were very much astonished,
when daylight came, to find themselves in the middle of the sea, without
a boat, and far from all help. She began to cry, and cried so piteously,
that even the fishes had compassion on her: she did not know what to do,
nor what would become of her. "There is no doubt," she said, "that the
King of the Peacocks ordered me to be thrown into the sea, having
repented his promise of marrying me, and to get rid of me quietly he has
had me drowned. What a strange man!" she continued, "for I should have
loved him so much! We should have been so happy together," and with that
she burst out crying afresh, for she could not help still loving him.
She remained floating about on the sea for two days, wet to the skin,
and almost dead with cold; she was so benumbed by it, that if it had not
been for little Fretillon, who lay beside her and kept a little warmth
in her, she could not have survived. She was famished with hunger, and
seeing the oysters in their shells, she took as many of these as she
wanted and ate them; Fretillon did the same, to keep himself alive,
although he did not like such food. Rosette became still more alarmed
when the night set in. "Fretillon," she said, "keep on barking, to
frighten away the soles, for fear they should eat us." So Fretillon
barked all night, and when the morning came, the Princess was floating
near the shore. Close to the sea at this spot, there lived a good old
man; he was poor, and did not care for the things of the world, and no
one ever visited him in his little hut. He was very much surprised when
heard Fretillon barking, for no dogs ever came in that direction; he
thought some travellers must have lost their way, and went out with the
kind intention of putting them on the right road again. All at once he
caught sight of the Princess and Fretillon floating on the sea, and the
Princess, seeing him, stretched out her arms to him, crying out, "Good
man, save me, or I shall perish; I have been in the water like this for
two days." When he heard her speak so sorrowfully, he had great pity on
her, and went back into his hut to fetch a long hook; he waded into the
water up to his neck, and once or twice narrowly escaped drowning. At
last, however, he succeeded in dragging the bed on to the shore. Rosette
and Fretillon were overjoyed to find themselves again on dry ground; and
were full of gratitude to the kind old man. Rosette wrapped herself in
her coverlet, and walked bare-footed into the hut, where the old man lit
a little fire of dry straw, and took one of his dead wife's best dresses
out of a trunk, with some stockings and shoes, and gave them to the
Princess. Dressed in her peasant's attire, she looked as beautiful as
the day, and Fretillon capered round her and made her laugh. The old man
guessed that Rosette was some great lady, for her bed was embroidered
with gold and silver, and her mattress was of satin. He begged her to
tell him her story, promising not to repeat what she told him if she so
wished. So she related to him all that had befallen her, crying bitterly
the while, for she still thought that it was the King of the Peacocks
who had ordered her to be drowned.

"What shall we do, my daughter?" said the old man. "You are a Princess
and accustomed to the best of everything, and I have but poor fare to
offer, black bread and radishes; but if you will let me, I will go and
tell the King of the Peacocks that you are here; if he had once seen
you, he would assuredly marry you." "Alas! he is a wicked man," said
Rosette; "he would only put me to death; but if you can lend me a little
basket, I will tie it round Fretillon's neck, and he will have very bad
luck, if he does not manage to bring back some food."

The old man gave her a basket, which she fastened to Fretillon's neck,
and then said, "Go to the best kitchen in the town, and bring me back
what you find in the saucepan." Fretillon ran off to the town, and as
there was no better kitchen than that of the King, he went in, uncovered
the saucepan, and cleverly carried off all that was in it; then he
returned to the hut. Rosette said to him, "Go back and take whatever you
can find of the best in the larder." Fretillon went back to the King's
larder, and took white bread, wine, and all sorts of fruits and
sweetmeats; he was so laden that he could only just manage to carry the
things home.

When the King of the Peacocks' dinner hour arrived, there was nothing
for him either in the saucepan or in the larder; his attendants looked
askance at one another, and the King was in a terrible rage. "It seems,
then, that I am to have no dinner; but see that the spit is put before
the fire, and let me have some good roast meat this evening." The
evening came, and the Princess said to Fretillon, "Go to the best
kitchen in the town and bring me a joint of good roast meat." Fretillon
obeyed, and knowing no better kitchen than that of the King, he went
softly in, while the cooks' backs were turned, took the meat, which was
of the best kind, from the spit, and carried it back in his basket to
the Princess. She sent him back without delay to the larder, and he
carried off all the preserves and sweetmeats that had been prepared for
the King.

The King, having had no dinner, was very hungry, and ordered supper to
be served early, but no supper was forthcoming; enraged beyond words, he
was forced to go supperless to bed.

The same thing happened the following day, both as to dinner and supper;
so that the King, for three days, was without meat or drink, for every
time he sat down to table, it was found that the meal that had been
prepared had been stolen. His chief adviser, fearing for the life of the
King, hid himself in the corner of the kitchen to watch; he kept his
eyes on the saucepan, that was boiling over the fire, and what was his
surprise to see enter a little green dog, with one ear, that uncovered
the pot, and put the meat in its basket. He followed it to see where it
would go; he saw it leave the town, and still following, came to the old
man's hut. Then he went and told the King that it was to a poor
peasant's home that the food was carried morning and evening. The King
was greatly astonished, and ordered more inquiries to be made. His chief
adviser, anxious for favour, decided to go himself, taking with him a
body of archers. They found the old man and Rosette at dinner, eating
the meat that had been stolen from the King's kitchen, and they seized
them, and bound them with cords, taking Fretillon prisoner at the same
time.

They brought word to the King that the delinquents had been captured,
and he replied, "To-morrow, the last day of reprieve for my two insolent
prisoners will expire; they and these thieves shall die together." He
then went into his court of justice. The old man threw himself on his
knees before him, and begged to be allowed to tell him everything. As he
was speaking, the King looked towards the beautiful Princess, and his
heart was touched when he saw her crying. When, therefore, the old man
said that she was the Princess Rosette who had been thrown into the
water, in spite of the weak condition he was in from having starved for
so long, he gave three bounds of joy, ran and embraced her, and untied
her cords, declaring the while that he loved her with all his heart.

They at once went to find the Princes, who thought they were going to
be put to death, and came forward in great dejection and hanging their
heads; the nurse and her daughter were brought in at the same time. The
brothers and sister recognised one another, as soon as they were brought
face to face, and Rosette threw herself on her brothers' necks. The
nurse and her daughter, and the boatman, begged on their knees for
mercy, and the universal rejoicing and their own joy were so great, that
the King and the Princess pardoned them, and gave the good old man a
handsome reward, and from that time he continued to live in the palace.

Finally, the King of the Peacocks did all in his power to atone for his
conduct to the King and his brother, expressing the deepest regret at
having treated them so badly. The nurse restored to Rosette all her
beautiful clothes and the bushel of golden crowns, and the wedding
festivities lasted a fortnight. Everyone was happy down to Fretillon,
who ate nothing but partridge wings for the rest of his life.


THE END


_Colston & Coy. Limited, Printers, Edinburgh._




Transcriber's Note:

Punctuation has been standardised. Changes to the original publication
have been made as follows:

    Page 64
    as he was entirly governed by _changed to_
    as he was entirely governed by

    Page 70
    your are!" said she to them, _changed to_
    you are!" said she to them,

    Page 110
    they would he obliged to go and _changed to_
    they would be obliged to go and

    Page 115
    withdrew, and the merchant said ro _changed to_
    withdrew, and the merchant said to

    Page 124
    reassurred, for the Beast, after _changed to_
    reassured, for the Beast, after

    Page 148
    on a piece of rag; for she possesed _changed to_
    on a piece of rag; for she possessed

    Page 151
    of the room. The The King and _changed to_
    of the room. The King and

    Page 163
    windwill, and three rows of teeth _changed to_
    windmill, and three rows of teeth

    Page 191
    said that she was the Prrincess Rosette _changed to_
    said that she was the Princess Rosette





End of Project Gutenberg's Tales of Passed Times, by Charles Perrault



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES OF PASSED TIMES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



