The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Fairy Book
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Fairy Book

Author: Dinah Maria Mulock Craik

Release date: November 7, 2006 [eBook #19734]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
        Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FAIRY BOOK ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           THE FAIRY BOOK.

                  THE BEST POPULAR STORIES SELECTED
                          AND RENDERED ANEW.



                                  BY

                             MISS MULOCK

                            THE AUTHOR OF
                      "JOHN HALIFAX, GENTLEMAN."




                         NEW YORK AND LONDON:
                    HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS.

       *       *       *       *       *




DEDICATED

TO

LITTLE OLIVE.

       *       *       *       *       *




PREFACE.


A preface is usually an excrescence on a good book, and a vain apology
for a worthless one; but, in the present instance, a few explanatory
words seem necessary.

This is meant to be the best collection attainable of that delight of
all children, and of many grown people who retain the child-heart
still--the old-fashioned, time-honored classic Fairy-tale. It has been
compiled from all sources--far-off and familiar; when familiar, the
stories have been traced with care to their original form, which, if
foreign, has been retranslated, condensed, and in any other needful
way made suitable for modern British children. Perrault, Madame
d'Aulnois, and Grimm have thus been laid under contribution. Where it
was not possible to get at the original of a tale, its various
versions have been collated, compared, and combined; and in some
instances, when this proved still unsatisfactory, the whole story has
been written afresh. The few English fairy tales extant, such as _Jack
the Giant Killer, Tom Thumb_, etc., whose authorship is lost in
obscurity, but whose charming Saxon simplicity of style, and intense
realism of narration, make for them an ever-green immortality--these
have been left intact, for no later touch would improve them. All
modern stories have been excluded.

Of course, in fairy tales, instruction is not expected; we find in
them only the rude moral of virtue rewarded and vice punished. But
children will soon discover for themselves that in real life all
beautiful people are not good, nor all ugly ones wicked; that every
elder sister is not ungenerous, nor every stepmother cruel. And the
tender baby-heart is often reached quite as soon by the fancy as by
the reason. Nevertheless, without any direct appeal to conscience or
morality, the Editor of this collection has been especially careful
that there should be nothing in it which could really harm a child.

She trusts that, whatever its defects, the Fairy Book will not deserve
one criticism, almost the sharpest that can be given to any
work--"that it would have been better if the author had taken more
pains."

       *       *       *       *       *




CONTENTS.


THE SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD

HOP-O'-MY-THUMB

CINDERELLA; OR, THE LITTLE GLASS SLIPPER

ADVENTURES OF JOHN DIETRICH

BEAUTY AND THE BEAST

LITTLE ONE EYE, LITTLE TWO EYES, AND LITTLE THREE EYES

JACK THE GIANT KILLER

TOM THUMB

RUMPELSTILZCHEN

FORTUNATUS

THE BREMEN TOWN MUSICIANS

RIQUET WITH THE TUFT

HOUSE ISLAND

SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE RED

JACK AND THE BEAN-STALK

GRACIOSA AND PERCINET

THE IRON STOVE

THE INVISIBLE PRINCE

THE WOODCUTTER'S DAUGHTER

BROTHER AND SISTER

LITTLE RED-RIDING-HOOD

PUSS IN BOOTS

THE WOLF AND THE SEVEN YOUNG GOSLINGS

THE FAIR ONE WITH GOLDEN LOOKS

THE BUTTERFLY

THE FROG-PRINCE

THE WHITE CAT

PRINCE CHERRY

LITTLE SNOWDROP

THE BLUE BIRD

THE YELLOW DWARF

THE SIX SWANS

THE PRINCE WITH THE NOSE

THE HIND OF THE FOREST

THE JUNIPER TREE

CLEVER ALICE

       *       *       *       *       *




THE

SLEEPING BEAUTY IN THE WOOD.


Once there was a royal couple who grieved excessively because they had
no children. When at last, after long waiting, the queen presented her
husband with a little daughter, his majesty showed his joy by giving a
christening feast, so grand that the like of it was never known. He
invited all the fairies in the land--there were seven altogether--to
stand godmothers to the little princess; hoping that each might bestow
on her some good gift, as was the custom of good fairies in those
days.

After the ceremony, all the guests returned to the palace, where there
was set before each fairy-godmother a magnificent covered dish, with
an embroidered table-napkin, and a knife and fork of pure gold,
studded with diamonds and rubies. But alas! as they placed themselves
at table, there entered an old fairy who had never been invited,
because more than fifty years since she had left the king's dominion
on a tour of pleasure, and had not been heard of until this day. His
majesty, much troubled, desired a cover to be placed for her, but it
was of common delf, for he had ordered from his jeweller only seven
gold dishes for the seven fairies aforesaid. The elderly fairy thought
herself neglected, and muttered angry menaces, which were overheard by
one of the younger fairies, who chanced to sit beside her. This good
godmother, afraid of harm to the pretty baby, hastened to hide herself
behind the tapestry in the hall. She did this, because she wished all
the others to speak first--so that if any ill gift were bestowed on
the child, she might be able to counteract it.

The six now offered their good wishes--which, unlike most wishes, were
sure to come true. The fortunate little princess was to grow up the
fairest woman in the world; to have a temper sweet as an angel; to be
perfectly graceful and gracious; to sing like a nightingale; to dance
like a leaf on a tree; and to possess every accomplishment under the
sun. Then the old fairy's turn came. Shaking her head spitefully, she
uttered the wish that when the baby grew up into a young lady, and
learned to spin, she might prick her finger with the spindle and die
of the wound.

At this terrible prophecy all the guests shuddered; and some of the
more tender-hearted began to weep. The lately happy parents were
almost out of their wits with grief. Upon which the wise young fairy
appeared from behind the tapestry, saying cheerfully "Your majesties
may comfort yourselves; the princess shall not die. I have no power
to alter the ill-fortune just wished her by my ancient sister--her
finger must be pierced; and she shall then sink, not into the sleep of
death, but into a sleep that will last a hundred years. After that
time is ended, the son of a king will find her, awaken her, and marry
her."

Immediately all the fairies vanished.

The king, in the hope of avoiding his daughter's doom, issued an
edict, forbidding all persons to spin, and even to have
spinning-wheels in their houses, on pain of instant death. But it was
in vain. One day, when she was just fifteen years of age, the king and
queen left their daughter alone in one of their castles, when,
wandering about at her will, she came to an ancient donjon tower,
climbed to the top of it, and there found a very old woman--so old and
deaf that she had never heard of the king's edict--busy with her
wheel.

"What are you doing, good old woman?" said the princess.

"I'm spinning, my pretty child."

"Ah, how charming! Let me try if I can spin also."

She had no sooner taken up the spindle than, being lively and
obstinate, she handled it so awkwardly and carelessly that the point
pierced her finger. Though it was so small a wound, she fainted away
at once, and dropped silently down on the floor. The poor frightened
old woman called for help; shortly came the ladies in waiting, who
tried every means to restore their young mistress, but all their care
was useless. She lay, beautiful as an angel, the colour still
lingering in her lips and cheeks; her fair bosom softly stirred with
her breath: only her eyes were fast closed. When the king her father
and the queen her mother beheld her thus, they knew regret was
idle--all had happened as the cruel fairy meant. But they also knew
that their daughter would not sleep for ever, though after one hundred
years it was not likely they would either of them behold her
awakening. Until that happy hour should arrive, they determined to
leave her in repose. They sent away all the physicians and attendants,
and themselves sorrowfully laid her upon a bed of embroidery, in the
most elegant apartment of the palace. There she slept and looked like
a sleeping angel still.

When this misfortune happened, the kindly young fairy who had saved
the princess by changing her sleep of death into this sleep of a
hundred years, was twelve thousand leagues away in the kingdom of
Mataquin. But being informed of everything, she arrived speedily, in a
chariot of fire drawn by dragons. The king was somewhat startled by
the sight, but nevertheless went to the door of his palace, and, with
a mournful countenance, presented her his hand to descend.

The fairy condoled with his majesty, and approved of all he had done.
Then, being a fairy of great common sense and foresight, she suggested
that the princess, awakening after a hundred years in this ancient
castle, might be a good deal embarrassed, especially with a young
prince by her side, to find herself alone. Accordingly, without asking
any one's leave, she touched with her magic wand the entire population
of the palace--except the king and queen; governesses, ladies of
honour, waiting-maids, gentlemen ushers, cooks, kitchen-girls, pages,
footmen--down to the horses that were in the stables, and the grooms
that attended them, she touched each and all. Nay, with kind
consideration for the feelings of the princess, she even touched the
little fat lap-dog, Puffy, who had laid himself down beside his
mistress on her splendid bed. He, like all the rest, fell fast asleep
in a moment. The very spits that were before the kitchen-fire ceased
turning, and the fire itself went out, and everything became as silent
as if it were the middle of the night, or as if the palace were a
palace of the dead.

The king and queen--having kissed their daughter and wept over her a
little, but not much, she looked so sweet and content--departed from
the castle, giving orders that it was to be approached no more. The
command was unnecessary; for in one quarter of an hour there sprung up
around it a wood so thick and thorny that neither beasts nor men could
attempt to penetrate there. Above this dense mass of forest could only
be perceived the top of the high tower where the lovely princess
slept.

A great many changes happen in a hundred years. The king, who never
had a second child, died, and his throne passed into another royal
family. So entirely was the story of the poor princess forgotten, that
when the reigning king's son, being one day out hunting and stopped in
the chase by this formidable wood, inquired what wood it was and what
were those towers which he saw appearing out of the midst of it, no
one could answer him. At length an old peasant was found who
remembered having heard his grandfather say to his father, that in
this tower was a princess, beautiful as the day, who was doomed to
sleep there for one hundred years, until awakened by a king's son, her
destined bridegroom.

At this, the young prince, who had the spirit of a hero, determined to
find out the truth for himself. Spurred on by both generosity and
curiosity, he leaped from his horse and began to force his way through
the thick wood. To his amazement the stiff branches all gave way, and
the ugly thorns sheathed themselves of their own accord, and the
brambles buried themselves in the earth to let him pass. This done,
they closed behind him, allowing none of his suite to follow: but,
ardent and young, he went boldly on alone. The first thing he saw was
enough to smite him with fear. Bodies of men and horses lay extended
on the ground; but the men had faces, not death-white, but red as
peonies, and beside them were glasses half filled with wine, showing
that they had gone to sleep drinking. Next he entered a large court,
paved with marble, where stood rows of guards presenting arms, but
motionless as if cut out of stone; then he passed through many
chambers where gentlemen and ladies, all in the costume of the past
century, slept at their ease, some standing, some sitting. The pages
were lurking in corners, the ladies of honour were stooping over their
embroidery frames, or listening apparently with polite attention to
the gentlemen of the court, but all were as silent as statues and as
immoveable. Their clothes, strange to say, were fresh and new as ever:
and not a particle of dust or spider-web had gathered over the
furniture, though it had not known a broom for a hundred years.
Finally the astonished prince came to an inner chamber, where was the
fairest sight his eyes had ever beheld.

A young girl of wonderful beauty lay asleep on an embroidered bed, and
she looked as if she had only just closed her eyes. Trembling, the
prince approached and knelt beside her. Some say he kissed her, but as
nobody saw it, and she never told, we cannot be quite sure of the
fact. However, as the end of the enchantment had come, the princess
awakened at once, and looking at him with eyes of the tenderest
regard, said drowsily, "Is it you, my prince? I have waited for you
very long."

Charmed with these words, and still more with the tone in which they
were uttered, the prince assured her that he loved her more than his
life. Nevertheless, he was the most embarrassed of the two; for,
thanks to the kind fairy, the princess had plenty of time to dream of
him during her century of slumber, while he had never even heard of
her till an hour before. For a long time did they sit conversing, and
yet had not said half enough. Their only interruption was the little
dog Puffy, who had awakened with his mistress, and now began to be
exceedingly jealous that the princess did not notice him as much as
she was wont to do.

Meantime all the attendants, whose enchantment was also broken, not
being in love, were ready to die of hunger after their fast of a
hundred years. A lady of honour ventured to intimate that dinner was
served; whereupon the prince handed his beloved princess at once to
the great hall. She did not wait to dress for dinner, being already
perfectly and magnificently attired, though in a fashion somewhat out
of date. However, her lover had the politeness not to notice this, nor
to remind her that she was dressed exactly like her royal grandmother,
whose portrait still hung on the palace walls.

During the banquet a concert took place by the attendant musicians,
and considering they had not touched their instruments for a century
they played extremely well. They ended with a wedding march: for that
very evening the marriage of the prince and princess was celebrated,
and though the bride was nearly one hundred years older than the
bridegroom, it is remarkable that the fact would never have been
discovered by any one unacquainted therewith.

After a few days they went together out of the castle and enchanted
wood, both of which immediately vanished, and were never more beheld
by mortal eyes. The princess was restored to her ancestral kingdom,
but it was not generally declared who she was, as during a hundred
years people had grown so very much cleverer that nobody then living
would ever have believed the story. So nothing was explained, and
nobody presumed to ask any questions about her, for ought not a prince
be able to marry whomsoever he pleases?

Nor--whether or not the day of fairies was over--did the princess ever
see anything further of her seven godmothers. She lived a long and
happy life, like any other ordinary woman, and died at length,
beloved, regretted, but, the prince being already no more, perfectly
contented.




HOP-O'-MY-THUMB.


There once lived in a village a faggot-maker and his wife, who had
seven children, all boys; the eldest was no more than ten years old,
and the youngest was only seven.

It was odd enough, to be sure, that they should have so many children
in such a short time; but the truth is, the wife always brought him
two and once three at a time. This made him very poor, for not one of
these boys was old enough to get a living, and what was still worse,
the youngest was a puny little fellow who hardly ever spoke a word.
Now this, indeed, was a mark of his good sense, but it made his father
and mother suppose him to be silly, and they thought that at last he
would turn out quite a fool. This boy was the least size ever seen;
for when he was born he was no bigger than a man's thumb, which made
him be christened by the name of Hop-o'-my-thumb. The poor child was
the drudge of the whole house and always bore the blame of everything
that was done wrong. For all this, Hop-o'-my-thumb was far more clever
than any of his brothers; and though he spoke but little, he heard and
knew more than people thought. It happened just at this time, that for
want of rain the fields had grown but half as much corn and potatoes
as they used to grow; so that the faggot-maker and his wife could not
give the boys the food they had before, which was always either bread
or potatoes.

After the father and mother had grieved some time, they thought that
as they could contrive no other way to live, they must somehow get rid
of their children. One night when the boys were gone to bed, and the
faggot-maker and his wife were sitting over a few lighted sticks, to
warm themselves, the husband sighed deeply, and said, "You see, my
dear, we cannot maintain our children any longer, and to see them die
of hunger before my eyes is what I could never bear. I will,
therefore, to-morrow morning take them to the forest, and leave them
in the thickest part of it, so that they will not be able to find
their way back: this will be very easy; for while they amuse
themselves with tying up the faggots, we need only slip away when they
are looking some other way."

"Ah! husband," cried the poor wife, "you cannot, no, you never can
consent to be the death of your own children."

The husband in vain told her to think how very poor they were.

The wife replied "that this was true, to be sure; but if she was poor,
she was still their mother;" and then she cried as if her heart would
break. At last she thought how shocking it would be to see them
starved to death before their eyes; so she agreed to what her husband
had said, and then went sobbing to bed.

Hop-o'-my-thumb had been awake all the time; and when he heard his
father talk very seriously, he slipped away from his brothers' side,
and crept under his father's bed, to hear all that was said without
being seen.

When his father and mother had left off talking, he got back to his
own place, and passed the night in thinking what he should do the next
morning.

He rose early, and ran to the river's side, where he filled his
pockets with small white pebbles, and then went back home. In the
morning they all set out, as their father and mother had agreed on;
and Hop-o'-my-thumb did not say a word to any of his brothers about
what he had heard. They came to a forest that was so very thick that
they could not see each other a few yards off. The faggot-maker set to
work cutting down wood; and the children began to gather the twigs, to
make faggots of them.

When the father and mother saw that the young ones were all very busy,
they slipped away without being seen. The children soon found
themselves alone, and began to cry as loud as they could.
Hop-o'-my-thumb let them cry on, for he knew well enough how to lead
them safe home, an he had taken care to drop the white pebbles he had
in his pocket along all the way he had come. He only said to them,
"Never mind it, my lads: father and mother have left us here by
ourselves, but only take care to follow me, and I will lead you back
again."

When they heard this they left off crying, and followed
Hop-o'-my-thumb, who soon brought them to their father's house by the
very same path which they had come along. At first they had not the
courage to go in; but stood at the door to hear what their parents
were talking about. Just as the faggot-maker and his wife had come
home without their children, a great gentleman of the village sent to
pay them two guineas, for work they had done for him, which he had
owed them so long that they never thought of getting a farthing of it.
This money made them quite happy; for the poor creatures were very
hungry, and had no other way of getting anything to eat.

The faggot-maker sent his wife out immediately to buy some meat; and
as it was a long time since she had made a hearty meal, she bought as
much meat as would have been enough for six or eight persons. The
truth was, when she was thinking what would be enough for dinner, she
forgot that her children were not at home; but as soon as she and her
husband had done eating, she cried out, "Alas! where are our poor
children? how they would feast on what we have left! It was all your
fault, husband! I told you we should repent leaving them to starve in
the forest!--Oh mercy! perhaps they have already been eaten by the
hungry wolves!" The poor woman shed plenty of tears: "Alas! alas!"
said she, over and over again, "what is become of my dear children?"

The children, who were all at the door, cried out together, "Here we
are, mother, here we are!"

She flew like lightning to let them in, and kissed every one of them.

The faggot-maker and his wife were charmed at having their children
once more with them, and their joy for this lasted till their money
was all spent; but then they found themselves quite as ill off as
before. So by degrees they again thought of leaving them in the
forest: and that the young ones might not come back a second time,
they said they would take them a great deal farther than they did at
first. They could not talk about this matter so slily but that
Hop-o'-my-thumb found means to hear all that passed between them; but
he cared very little about it, for he thought it would be easy for him
to do just the same as he had done before. But though he got up very
early the next morning to go to the river's side to get the pebbles, a
thing which he had not thought of hindered him; for he found that the
house-door was double-locked. Hop-o'-my-thumb was now quite at a loss
what to do; but soon after this, his mother gave each of the children
a piece of bread for breakfast, and then it came into his head that he
could make his share do as well as the pebbles, by dropping crumbs of
it all the way as he went. So he did not eat his piece, but put it
into his pocket.

It was not long before they all set out, and their parents took care
to lead them into the very thickest and darkest part of the forest.
They then slipped away by a by-path as before, and left the children
by themselves again. All this did not give Hop-o'-my-thumb any
concern, for he thought himself quite sure of getting back by means
of the crumbs that he had dropped by the way; but when he came to look
for them he found that not a crumb was left, for the birds had eaten
them all up.

The poor children were now sadly off, for the further they went the
harder it was for them to get out of the forest. At last night came
on, and the noise of the wind among the trees seemed to them like the
howling of wolves, so that every moment they thought they should be
eaten up. They hardly dared to speak a word, or to move a limb, for
fear. Soon after there came a heavy rain, which wetted them to the
very skin, and made the ground so slippery, that they fell down almost
at every step, and got dirty all over.

Before it was quite dark, Hop-o'-my-thumb climbed up to the top of a
tree, and looked round on all sides to see if he could find any way of
getting help. He saw a small light, like that of a candle, but it was
a very great way off, and beyond the forest. He then came down from
the tree, to try to find the way to it; but he could not see it when
he was on the ground, and he was in the utmost trouble what to do
next. They walked on towards the place where he had seen the light,
and at last reached the end of the forest, and got sight of it again.
They now walked faster; and after being much tired and vexed (for
every time they got into lower ground they lost sight of the light),
came to the house it was in. They knocked at the door, which was
opened by a very good-natured-looking lady, who asked what brought
them there. Hop-o'-my-thumb told her that they were poor children, who
had lost their way in the forest, and begged that she would give them
a bed till morning. When the lady saw that they had such pretty faces,
she began to shed tears and said, "Ah! my poor children, you do not
know what place you are come to. This is the house of an Ogre, who
eats up little boys and girls."

"Alas! madam," replied Hop-o'-my-thumb, who trembled from head to
foot, "what shall we do? If we go back to the forest, we are sure of
being torn to pieces by the wolves; we would rather, therefore, be
eaten by the gentleman: besides, when he sees us, perhaps he may take
pity on us and spare our lives."

The Ogre's wife thought she could contrive to hide them from her
husband till morning; so she let them go in and warm themselves by a
good fire, before which there was a whole sheep roasting for the
Ogre's supper. When they had stood a short time by the fire, there
came a loud knocking at the door: this was the Ogre come home. His
wife hurried the children under the bed, and told them to lie still,
and she then let her husband in.

The Ogre asked if supper were ready, and if the wine were fetched from
the cellar; and then he sat down at the table. The sheep was not quite
done, but he liked it much better half raw. In a minute or two the
Ogre began to snuff to his right and left, and said he smelt child's
flesh.

"It must be this calf which has just been killed," said his wife.

"I smell child's flesh, I tell thee once more," cried the Ogre,
looking all about the room; "I smell child's flesh; there is something
going on that I do not know of."

As soon as he had spoken these words, he rose from his chair and went
towards the bed.

"Ah! madam," said he, "you thought to cheat me, did you? Wretch! thou
art old and tough thyself, or else I would eat thee up too! But come,
come, this is lucky enough; for the brats will make a nice dish for
three Ogres, who are my particular friends, and who are to dine with
me to-morrow."

He then drew them out one by one from under the bed. The poor children
fell on their knees and begged his pardon as humbly as they could; but
this Ogre was the most cruel of all Ogres, and instead of feeling any
pity, he only began to think how sweet and tender their flesh would
be; so he told his wife they would be nice morsels, if she served them
up with plenty of sauce. He then fetched a large knife, and began to
sharpen it on a long whetstone that he held in his left hand; and all
the while he came nearer and nearer to the bed. The Ogre took up one
of the children, and was going to set about cutting him to pieces; but
his wife said to him, "What in the world makes you take the trouble of
killing them to-night? Will it not be time enough to-morrow morning?"

"Hold your prating," replied the Ogre; "they will grow tender by being
kept a little while after they are killed."

"But," said his wife, "you have got so much meat in the house already;
here is a calf, two sheep and half a pig."

"True," said the Ogre, "so give them all a good supper, that they may
not get lean, and then send them to bed."

The good creature was quite glad at this. She gave them plenty for
their supper, but the poor children were so terrified that they could
not eat a bit.

The Ogre sat down to his wine, very much pleased with the thought of
giving his friends such a dainty dish: this made him drink rather more
than common, and he was soon obliged to go to bed himself. Now the
Ogre had seven daughters, who were all very young like Hop-o'-my-thumb
and his brothers. These young Ogresses had fair skins, because they
fed on raw meat like their father; but they had small grey eyes, quite
round, and sunk in their heads, hooked noses, wide mouths, and very
long sharp teeth standing a great way off each other. They were too
young as yet to do much mischief; but they showed that if they lived
to be as old as their father, they would grow quite as cruel as he
was, for they took pleasure already in biting young children, and
sucking their blood. The Ogresses had been put to bed very early that
night; they were all in one bed, which was very large, and every one
of them had a crown of gold on her head. There was another bed of the
same size in the room, and in this the Ogre's wife put the seven
little boys, and then went to bed herself along with her husband.

Now Hop-o'-my-thumb was afraid that the Ogre would wake in the night
and kill him and his brothers while they were asleep. So he got out of
bed in the middle of the night as softly as he could, took off all his
brothers' nightcaps and his own, and crept with them to the bed that
the Ogre's daughters were in: he then took off their crowns, and put
the nightcaps on their heads instead: next he put the crowns on his
brothers' heads and his own, and got into bed again; expecting, after
this, that, if the Ogre should come, he would take him and his
brothers for his own children. Everything turned out as he wished. The
Ogre waked soon after midnight, and began to be very sorry that he had
put off killing the boys till the morning: so he jumped out of bed,
and took hold of his large knife. "Let us see," said he, "what the
young rogues are about, and do the business at once!" He then walked
softly to the room where they all slept, and went up to the bed the
boys were in, who were all asleep except Hop-o'-my-thumb. He touched
their heads one at a time, and feeling the crowns of gold, said to
himself, "Oh, oh! I had like to have made such a mistake. I must have
drunk too much wine last night."

He went next to the bed that his own little Ogresses were in, and when
he felt the nightcaps, he said, "Ah! here you are, my lads:" and so in
a moment he cut the throats of all his daughters.

He was very much pleased when he had done this, and then went back to
his own bed. As soon as Hop-o'-my-thumb heard him snore, he awoke his
brothers, and told them to put on their clothes quickly, and follow
him. They stole down softly into the garden, and then jumped from the
wall into the road: they ran as fast as their legs could carry them,
but were so much afraid all the while, that they hardly knew which way
to take. When the Ogre waked in the morning, he said to his wife,
grinning, "My dear, go and dress the young rogues I saw last night."

The wife was quite surprised at hearing her husband speak so kindly,
and did not dream of the real meaning of his words. She supposed he
wanted her to help them to put on their clothes; so she went upstairs,
and the first thing she saw was her seven daughters with their throats
cut and all over blood. This threw her into a fainting fit. The Ogre
was afraid his wife might be too long in doing what he had set her
about, so he went himself to help her; but he was as much shocked as
she had been at the dreadful sight of his bleeding children. "Ah! what
have I done?" he cried; "but the little rascals shall pay for it, I
warrant them."

He first threw some water on his wife's face; and, as soon as she came
to herself, he said to her: "Bring me quickly my seven-league boots,
that I may go and catch the little vipers."

The Ogre then put on these boots, and set out with all speed. He
strided over many parts of the country, and at last turned into the
very road in which the poor children were. For they had set off
towards the faggot-maker's cottage, which they had almost reached.
They watched the Ogre stepping from mountain to mountain at one step,
and crossing rivers as if they had been tiny brooks. At this
Hop-o'-my-thumb thought a little what was to be done; and spying a
hollow place under a large rock, he made his brothers get into it. He
then crept in himself, but kept his eye fixed on the Ogre, to see what
he would do next.

The Ogre found himself quite weary with the journey he had gone, for
seven-league boots are very tiresome to the person who wears them; so
he now began to think of resting, and happened to sit down on the very
rock where the poor children were hid. As he was so tired, and it was
a very hot day, he fell fast asleep, and soon began to snore so loud,
that the little fellows were terrified.

When Hop-o'-my-thumb saw this he said to his brothers, "Courage, my
lads! never fear! you have nothing to do but to steal away and get
home while the Ogre is fast asleep, and leave me to shift for myself."

The brothers now were very glad to do whatever he told them, and so
they soon came to their father's house. In the mean time
Hop-o'-my-thumb went up to the Ogre softly, pulled off his
seven-league boots very gently, and put them on his own legs: for
though the boots were very large, yet being fairy-boots, they could
make themselves small enough to fit any leg they pleased.

As soon as ever Hop-o'-my-thumb had made sure of the Ogre's
seven-league boots, he went at once to the palace, and offered his
services to carry orders from the king to his army, which was a great
way off, and to bring back the quickest accounts of the battle they
were just at that time fighting with the enemy. In short, he thought
he could be of more use to the king than all his mail coaches, and so
should make his fortune in this manner. He succeeded so well, that in
a short time he made money enough to keep himself, his father, mother,
and six brothers, without the trouble of working, for the rest of
their lives. Having done this, he went back to his father's cottage,
where all the family were delighted to see him again. As the great
fame of his boots had been talked of at court in this time, the king
sent for him, and indeed employed him very often in the greatest
affairs of the state, so that he became one of the richest men in the
kingdom.

And now let us see what became of the wicked Ogre. He slept so soundly
that he never discovered the loss of his boots; but having an evil
conscience and bad dreams, he fell in his sleep from the corner of the
rock where Hop-o'-my-thumb and his brothers had left him, and bruised
himself so much from head to foot, that he could not stir: so he was
forced to stretch himself out at full length, and wait for some one to
come and help him.

Now a good many faggot-makers passed near the place where the Ogre
lay; and, when they heard him groan, they went up to ask him what was
the matter. But the Ogre had eaten such a great number of children in
his lifetime, that he had grown so very big and fat that these men
could not even have carried one of his legs; so they were forced to
leave him there. At last night came on, and then a large serpent came
out of a wood just by, and stung him, so that he died in great pain.

By and by, Hop-o'-my-thumb, who had become the king's first favourite,
heard of the Ogre's death; and the first thing he did was to tell his
majesty all that the good-natured Ogress had done to save the lives of
himself and brothers. The king was so much pleased at what he heard,
that he asked Hop-o'-my-thumb if there was any favour he could bestow
upon her? Hop-o'-my-thumb thanked the king, and desired that the
Ogress might have the noble title of Duchess of Draggletail given to
her; which was no sooner asked than granted. The Ogress then came to
court, and lived very happily for many years, enjoying the vast
fortune she had found in the Ogre's chests. As for Hop-o'-my-thumb, he
every day grew more witty and brave; till at last the king made him
the greatest lord in the kingdom, and set him over all his affairs.




CINDERELLA

OR,

The Little Glass Slipper.


There was once an honest gentle man who took for his second wife a
lady, the proudest and most disagreeable in the whole country. She had
two daughters exactly like herself in all things. He also had one
little girl, who resembled her dead mother, the best woman in all the
world. Scarcely had the second marriage taken place, than the
stepmother became jealous of the good qualities of the little girl,
who was so great a contrast to her own two daughters. She gave her all
the menial occupations of the house; compelled her to wash the floors
and staircases, to dust the bed-rooms, and clean the grates; and while
her sisters occupied carpeted chambers hung with mirrors, where they
could see themselves from head to foot, this poor little damsel was
sent to sleep in an attic, on an old straw mattress, with only one
chair and not a looking-glass in the room.

She suffered all in silence, not daring to complain to her father, who
was entirely ruled by his new wife. When her daily work was done she
used to sit down in the chimney-corner among the ashes; from which the
two sisters gave her the nick-name of _Cinderella_. But Cinderella,
however shabbily clad, was handsomer than they were with all their
fine clothes.

It happened that the king's son gave a series of balls, to which were
invited all the rank and fashion of the city, and among the rest the
two elder sisters. They were very proud and happy, and occupied their
whole time in deciding what they should wear; a source of new trouble
to Cinderella, whose duty it was to get up their fine linen and laces,
and who never could please them however much she tried. They talked of
nothing but their clothes.

"I," said the elder, "shall wear my velvet gown and my trimmings of
English lace."

"And I," added the younger, "will have but my ordinary silk petticoat,
but I shall adorn it with an upper skirt of flowered brocade, and
shall put on my diamond tiara, which is a great deal finer than
anything of yours."

Here the elder sister grew angry, and the dispute began to run so
high, that Cinderella, who was known to have excellent taste, was
called upon to decide between them. She gave them the best advice she
could, and gently and submissively offered to dress them herself, and
especially to arrange their hair, an accomplishment in which she
excelled many a noted coiffeur. The important evening came, and she
exercised all her skill to adorn the two young ladies. While she was
combing out the elder's hair, this ill-natured girl said sharply,
"Cinderella, do you not wish you were going to the ball?"

"Ah, madam" (they obliged her always to say madam), "you are only
mocking me; it is not my fortune to have any such pleasure."

"You are right; people would only laugh to see a little cinder-wench
at a ball."

Any other than Cinderella would have dressed the hair all awry, but
she was good, and dressed it perfectly even and smooth, and as
prettily as she could.

The sisters had scarcely eaten for two days, and had broken a dozen
stay-laces a day, in trying to make themselves slender; but to-night
they broke a dozen more, and lost their tempers over and over again
before they had completed their toilette. When at last the happy
moment arrived, Cinderella followed them to the coach; after it had
whirled them away, she sat down by the kitchen fire and cried.

Immediately her godmother, who was a fairy, appeared beside her. "What
are you crying for, my little maid?"

"Oh, I wish--I wish--" Her sobs stopped her.

"You wish to go to the ball; isn't it so?"

Cinderella nodded.

"Well, then, be a good girl, and you shall go. First run into the
garden and fetch me the largest pumpkin you can find."

Cinderella did not comprehend what this had to do with her going to
the ball, but being obedient and obliging, she went. Her godmother
took the pumpkin, and having scooped out all its inside, struck it
with her wand; it became a splendid gilt coach, lined with
rose-coloured satin.

"Now fetch me the mouse-trap out of the pantry, my dear."

Cinderella brought it; it contained six of the fattest, sleekest mice.
The fairy lifted up the wire door, and as each mouse ran out she
struck it and changed it into a beautiful black horse.

"But what shall I do for your coachman, Cinderella?"

Cinderella suggested that she had seen a large black rat in the
rat-trap, and he might do for want of better.

"You are right; go and look again for him."

He was found, and the fairy made him into a most respectable coachman,
with the finest whiskers imaginable. She afterwards took six lizards
from behind the pumpkin frame, and changed them into six footmen, all
in splendid livery, who immediately jumped up behind the carriage, as
if they had been footmen all their days. "Well, Cinderella, now you
can go to the ball."

"What, in these clothes?" said Cinderella piteously, looking down on
her ragged frock.

Her godmother laughed, and touched her also with the wand; at which
her wretched thread-bare jacket became stiff with gold, and sparkling
with jewels; her woollen petticoat lengthened into a gown of sweeping
satin, from underneath which peeped out her little feet, no longer
bare, but covered with silk stockings, and the prettiest glass
slippers in the world. "Now Cinderella, depart; but remember, if you
stay one instant after midnight, your carriage will become a pumpkin,
your coachman a rat, your horses mice, and your footmen lizards; while
you yourself will be the little cinder-wench you were an hour ago."

Cinderella promised without fear, her heart was so full of joy.

Arrived at the palace, the king's son, whom some one, probably the
fairy, had told to await the coming of an uninvited princess whom
nobody knew, was standing at the entrance, ready to receive her. He
offered her his hand, and led her with the utmost courtesy through the
assembled guests, who stood aside to let her pass, whispering to one
another, "Oh, how beautiful she is!" It might have turned the head of
any one but poor Cinderella, who was so used to be despised, that she
took it all as if it were something happening in a dream.

Her triumph was complete; even the old king said to the queen, that
never since her majesty's young days had he seen so charming and
elegant a person. All the court ladies, scanned her eagerly, clothes
and all, determining to have theirs made next day of exactly the same
pattern. The king's son himself led her out to dance, and she danced
so gracefully that he admired her more and more. Indeed, at supper,
which was fortunately early, his admiration quite took away his
appetite. For Cinderella herself, with an involuntary shyness she
sought out her sisters; placed herself beside them and offered them
all sorts of civil attentions, which, coming as they supposed from a
stranger, and so magnificent a lady, almost overwhelmed them with
delight.

While she was talking with them, she heard the clock strike a quarter
to twelve, and making a courteous adieu to the royal family, she
re-entered her carriage, escorted tenderly by the king's son, and
arrived in safety at her own door. There she found her godmother, who
smiled approval; and of whom she begged permission to go to a second
ball, the following night, to which the queen had earnestly invited
her.

While she was talking, the two sisters were heard knocking at the
gate, and the fairy godmother vanished, leaving Cinderella sitting in
the chimney-corner, rubbing her eyes and pretending to be very sleepy.

"Ah," cried the eldest sister maliciously, "it has been the most
delightful ball, and there was present the most beautiful princess I
ever saw, who was so exceedingly polite to us both."

"Was she?" said Cinderella indifferently; "and who might she be?"

"Nobody knows, though everybody would give their eyes to know,
especially the king's son."

"Indeed!" replied Cinderella, a little more interested; "I should like
to see her. Miss Javotte"--that was the elder sister's name--"will you
not let me go to-morrow, and lend me your yellow gown that you wear on
Sundays?"

"What, lend my yellow gown to a cinder-wench! I am not so mad as
that;" at which refusal Cinderella did not complain, for if her sister
really had lent her the gown she would have been considerably
embarrassed.

The next night came, and the two young ladies richly dressed in
different toilettes, went to the ball. Cinderella, more splendidly
attired and beautiful than ever, followed them shortly after. "Now
remember twelve o'clock," was her godmother's parting speech; and she
thought she certainly should. But the prince's attentions to her were
greater even than the first evening, and in the delight of listening
to his pleasant conversation, time slipped by unperceived. While she
was sitting beside him in a lovely alcove, and looking at the moon
from under a bower of orange blossoms, she heard a clock strike the
first stroke of twelve. She started up, and fled away as lightly as a
deer.

Amazed, the prince followed, but could not catch her. Indeed he missed
his lovely princess altogether, and only saw running out of the palace
doors a little dirty lass whom he had never beheld before, and of whom
he certainly would never have taken the least notice, Cinderella
arrived at home breathless and weary, ragged and cold, without
carriage, or footmen, or coachman; the only remnant of her past
magnificence being one of her little glass slippers;--the other she
had dropped in the ball-room as she ran away.

When the two sisters returned they were full of this strange
adventure, how the beautiful lady had appeared at the ball more
beautiful than ever, and enchanted every one who looked at her; and
how as the clock was striking twelve she had suddenly risen up and
fled through the ball-room, disappearing no one knew how or where, and
dropping one of her glass slippers behind her in her flight. How the
king's son had remained inconsolable until he chanced to pick up the
little glass slipper, which he carried away in his pocket, and was
seen to take it out continually, and look at it affectionately, with
the air of a man very much in love; in fact, from his behaviour during
the remainder of the evening, all the court and royal family were
convinced that he had become desperately enamoured of the wearer of
the little glass slipper.

Cinderella listened in silence, turning her face to the kitchen fire,
and perhaps it was that which made her look so rosy, but nobody ever
noticed or admired her at home, so it did not signify, and next
morning she went to her weary work again just as before.

A few days after, the whole city was attracted by the sight of a
herald going round with a little glass slipper in his hand,
publishing, with a flourish of trumpets, that the king's son ordered
this to be fitted on the foot of every lady in the kingdom, and that
he wished to marry the lady whom it fitted best, or to whom it and the
fellow slipper belonged. Princesses, duchesses, countesses, and simple
gentlewomen all tried it on, but being a fairy slipper, it fitted
nobody and beside, nobody could produce its fellow slipper, which lay
all the time safely in the pocket of Cinderella's old linsey gown.

At last the herald came to the house of the two sisters, and though
they well knew neither of themselves was the beautiful lady, they made
every attempt to get their clumsy feet into the glass slipper, but in
vain.

"Let me try it on," said Cinderella from the chimney corner.

"What, you?" cried the others, bursting into shouts of laughter; but
Cinderella only smiled, and held out her hand.

Her sisters could not prevent her, since the command was that every
young maiden in the city should try on the slipper, in order that no
chance might be left untried, for the prince was nearly breaking his
heart; and his father and mother were afraid that though a prince, he
would actually die for love of the beautiful unknown lady.

So the herald bade Cinderella sit down on a three-legged stool in the
kitchen, and himself put the slipper on her pretty little foot, which
it fitted exactly; she then drew from her pocket the fellow slipper,
which she also put on, and stood up--for with the touch of the magic
shoes all her dress was changed likewise--no longer the poor despised
cinder-wench, but the beautiful lady whom the king's son loved.

Her sisters recognized her at once. Filled with astonishment, mingled
with no little alarm, they threw themselves at her feet, begging her
pardon for all their former unkindness. She raised and embraced them:
told them she forgave them with all her heart, and only hoped they
would love her always. Then she departed with the herald to the king's
palace, and told her whole story to his majesty and the royal family,
who were not in the least surprised, for everybody believed in
fairies, and everybody longed to have a fairy godmother.

For the young prince, he found her more lovely and loveable than ever,
and insisted upon marrying her immediately. Cinderella never went home
again, but she sent for her two sisters to the palace, and with the
consent of all parties married them shortly after to two rich
gentlemen of the court.




ADVENTURES OF JOHN DIETRICH.


There once lived in Rambin, a town near the Baltic Sea, an honest,
industrious man named James Dietrich. He had several children, all of
a good disposition, especially the youngest, whose name was John. John
Dietrich was a handsome, smart boy, diligent at school, and obedient
at home. His great passion was for hearing stories, and whenever he
met any one who was well stored with such, he never let him go till he
had heard them all.

When John was about eight years old he was sent to spend a summer with
his uncle, a farmer in Rodenkirchen. Here he had to keep cows with
other boys, and they used to drive them to graze about the Nine-hills,
where an old cowherd, one Klas Starkwolt, frequently came to join the
lads, and then they would sit down all together and tell stories.
Consequently Klas became John's best friend, for he knew stories
without end. He could tell all about the Nine-hills, and the
underground folk who inhabited them; how the giants disappeared from
the country, and the dwarfs or little people came in their stead.
These tales John swallowed so eagerly that he thought of nothing else,
and was for ever talking of golden cups, and crowns, and glass shoes,
and pockets full of ducats, and gold rings, and diamond coronets, and
snow-white brides, and the like. Old Klas used often to shake his head
at him and say, "John! John! what are you about? The spade and scythe
will be your sceptre and crown, and your bride will wear a garland of
rosemary and a gown of striped drill."

Still John almost longed to get into the Nine-hills, for Klas had told
him that any one who by luck or cunning should get the cap of one of
the little people might go down with safety, and instead of becoming
their slave, he would be their master. The fairy whose cap he got
would be his servant, and obey all his commands.

Midsummer-eve, when the days are longest and the nights shortest, was
now come. In the village of Rambin old and young kept the holiday, had
all sorts of plays, and told all kinds of stories. John, who knew that
this season was the time for all fairy-people to come abroad, could
now no longer contain himself, but the day after the festival he
slipped away to the Nine-hills, and when it grew dark laid himself
down on the top of the highest of them, which Klas had told him was
the principal dancing-ground of the underground people. John lay there
quite still from ten till twelve at night. At last it struck twelve.
Immediately there was a ringing and a singing in the hills, and then a
whispering and a lisping and a whiz and a buzz all about him, for the
little people were now come out, some whirling round and round in the
dance, and others sporting and tumbling about in the moonshine, and
playing a thousand merry pranks. He felt a secret dread creep over
him at this whispering and buzzing, for he could see nothing of them,
as the caps they wore made them invisible; but he lay quite still,
with his face in the grass and his eyes fast shut, snoring a little
just as if he was asleep. Yet now and then he ventured to open his
eyes a little and peep out, but not the slightest trace of them could
he see, though it was bright moonlight.

It was not long before three of the underground people came jumping up
to where he was lying; but they took no heed of him, and flung their
brown caps up into the air, and caught them from one another. At
length one snatched the cap out of the hand of another and flung it
away. It flew direct and fell upon John's head. He could feel, though
he could not see it; and the moment he did feel it, he caught hold of
it. Starting up, he swung it about for joy, and made the little silver
bell of it tingle, then set it upon his head, and--O wonderful to
relate!--that instant he saw the countless and merry swarm of the
little people.

The three little men came slily up to him, and thought by their
nimbleness to get back the cap, but he held his prize fast, and they
saw clearly that nothing was to be done in this way with him, for in
size and strength John was a giant in comparison of these little
fellows, who hardly reached his knee. The owner of the cap now came up
very humbly to the finder, and begged in as supplicating a tone as if
his life depended upon it, that he would give him back his cap. "No,"
said John, "you sly little rogue, you'll get the cap no more. That's
not the sort of thing: I should be in a nice perplexity if I had not
something of yours; now you have no power over me, but must do what I
please. And I will go down with you, and see how you live below and
you shall be my servant.--Nay, no grumbling, you know you must. And I
know it too, just as well as you do, for Klas Starkwolt told it to me
often and often."

The little man made as if he had not heard or understood one word of
all this; he began all his crying and whining over again, and wept,
and screamed, and howled most piteously for his little cap. But John
cut the matter short by saying to him, "Have done; you are my servant,
and I intend to take a trip with you." So the underground man gave up
the point; especially as he well knew there was no remedy.

John now flung away his old hat, and put on the cap, and set it firmly
on his head, lest it should slip off or fly away, for all his power
lay in it. He lost no time in trying its virtues, but commanded his
new servant to fetch him food and drink. The servant ran away like the
wind, and in a second was there again with bottles of wine, and bread,
and rich fruits. So John ate and drank, and looked on at the sports
and the dancing of the little people, and it pleased him right well,
and he behaved himself stoutly and wisely, as if he was a born master.

When the cock had now crowed for the third time, and the little larks
had made their first flutter in the sky, and the daybreak appeared in
slender white streaks in the east, then there went a whisper, hush,
hush, hush, through the bushes, and flowers, and trees; and the hills
rang again, and opened up, and the little men stole down and
disappeared. John gave close attention to every thing, and found that
it was exactly as he had been told. And behold! on the top of the hill
where they had just been dancing, and which was now full of grass and
flowers, as people see it by day, there rose, of a sudden, a small
glass door. Whosoever wanted to go in stepped upon this; it opened,
and he glided gently in, the glass closing again after him; and when
they had all entered it vanished, and there was no farther trace of it
to be seen. Those who descended through the glass door sank quite
gently into a wide silver tun or barrel, which held them all, and
could easily have harboured a thousand such little people. John and
his man went down also, along with several others, all of whom
screamed out and prayed him not to tread on them, for if his weight
came on them, they were dead men. He was, however, careful, and acted
in a very friendly way towards them. Several barrels of this kind went
up and down after each other, until all were in. They hung by long
silver chains, which were drawn and guided from below.

In his descent John was amazed at the wonderful brilliancy of the
walls between which the tun glided down. They seemed all studded with
pearls and diamonds, glittering and sparkling brightly, while below
him he heard the most beautiful music tinkling at a distance, so that
he did not know what he was about, and from excess of pleasure he fell
fast asleep.

He slept a long time, and when he awoke he found himself in the most
beautiful bed that could be, such as he had never seen in his father's
or any other house. It was also the prettiest little chamber in the
world, and his servant was beside him with a fan to keep away the
flies and gnats. He had hardly opened his eyes when his little servant
brought him a basin and towel, and held ready for him to put on the
nicest new clothes of brown silk, most beautifully made; with these
was a pair of new black shoes with red ribbons, such as John had never
beheld in Rambin or in Rodenkirchen either. There were also there
several pairs of glittering glass shoes, such as are only used on
great occasions. John was, we may well suppose, delighted to have such
clothes to wear, and he put them on joyfully. His servant then flew
like lightning and returned with a fine breakfast of wine and milk,
and delicate white bread and fruits, and such other things as little
boys are fond of. He now perceived, every moment, more and more, that
Klas Starkwolt, the old cowherd, knew what he was talking about, for
the splendour and magnificence here surpassed anything John had ever
dreamt of. His servant, too, was the most obedient one possible; a nod
or a sign was enough for him, for he was as wise as a bee, as all
these little people are by nature.

John's bedroom was all covered with emeralds and other precious
stones, and in the ceiling was a diamond as big as a nine-pin bowl,
that gave light to the whole chamber. In this place they have neither
sun, nor moon, nor stars to give them light; neither do they use lamps
or candles of any kind; but they live in the midst of precious stones,
and have the purest of gold and silver in abundance, from which they
manage to obtain light both by day and by night, though indeed,
properly speaking, as there is no sun here, there is no distinction of
day and night, and they reckon only by weeks. They set the brightest
and clearest precious stones in their dwellings, and the ways and
passages leading under the ground, and in the places where they have
their large halls, and their dances and feasts; and the sparkle of
these jewels makes a sort of silvery twilight which is far more
beautiful than common day.

When John had finished his breakfast, his servant opened a little door
in the wall, where was a closet with silver and gold cups and dishes
and other vessels, and baskets filled with ducats, and boxes of jewels
and precious stones. There were also charming pictures, and the most
delightful story-books he had seen in the whole course of his life.

John spent the morning looking at these things; and, when it was
mid-day, a bell rung, and his servant said, "Will you dine alone, sir,
or with the large company?"

"With the large company, to be sure," replied John. So his servant led
him out. John, however, saw nothing but solitary halls, lighted up
with precious stones, and here and there little men and women, who
appeared to him to glide out of the clefts and fissures of the rocks.
Wondering what it was the bells rang for, he said to his servant--"But
where is the company?" And scarcely had he spoken when the hall they
were in opened out to a great extent, and a canopy set with diamonds
and precious stones was drawn over it. At the same moment he saw an
immense throng of nicely dressed little men and women pouring in
through several open doors: the floor opened in several places, and
tables, covered with the most beautiful ware, and the most luscious
meats, and fruits, and wines, arranged themselves in rows, and the
chairs arranged themselves along beside the tables, and then the men
and women took their seats.

The principal persons now came forward, bowed to John, and led him to
their table, where they placed him among their most beautiful maidens,
a distinction which pleased John well. The party too was very merry,
for the underground people are extremely lively and cheerful, and can
never stay long quiet. Then the most charming music sounded over their
heads; and beautiful birds, flying about, sung sweetly: these were not
real but artificial birds, which the little men make so ingeniously
that they can fly about and sing like natural ones.

The servants of both sexes, who waited at table, and handed about the
gold cups, and the silver and crystal baskets with fruit, were mortal
children, whom some misfortune had thrown among the underground
people, and who, having come down without securing any pledge, such as
John's cap, had fallen into their power. These were differently clad
from their masters. The boys and girls were dressed in snow-white
coats and jackets, and wore glass shoes, so thin that their steps
could never be heard, with blue caps on their heads, and silver belts
round their waists.

John at first pitied them, seeing how they were forced to run about
and wait on the little people; but as they looked cheerful and happy,
and were handsomely dressed, and had such rosy cheeks, he said to
himself--"After all, they are not so badly off, and I was myself much
worse when I had to be running after the cows and bullocks. To be
sure, I am now a master here, and they are servants; but there is no
help for it: why were they so foolish as to let themselves be taken
and not get some pledge beforehand? At any rate, the time must come
when they shall be set at liberty, and they will certainly not be
longer than fifty years here." With these thoughts he consoled
himself, and sported and played away with his little playfellows, and
ate, and drank, and made his servant and the others tell him stories,
for he always liked to hear something strange, and to get to the
bottom of everything.

They sat at table about two hours: the principal person then rang a
little bell, and the tables and chairs all vanished in a whiff,
leaving the company standing on their feet. The birds now struck up a
most lively air, and the little people began to dance, jumping and
leaping and whirling round and round, as if the world were grown
dizzy. And the pretty little girls that sat next John caught hold of
him and whirled him about; and, without making any resistance, he
danced with them for two good hours. Every afternoon while he remained
there he used to do the same; and, to the last hour of his life, he
always spoke of it with the greatest glee.

When the music and dancing were over, it might be about four o'clock.
The little people then disappeared, and went each about their work or
their pleasure. After supper they sported and danced in the same way;
and at midnight, especially on starlight nights, they slipped out of
their hills to dance in the open air. John used then, like a good boy,
to say his prayers and go to sleep, a duty he never neglected either
in the evening or in the morning.

For the first week that John was in the glass-hill he only went from
his chamber to the great hall and back again. After then, however, he
began to walk about, making his servant show and explain everything to
him. He found that there were here most beautiful walks, in which he
might ramble along for miles, in all directions, without ever finding
an end of them, so immensely large was the hill that the little people
lived in, and yet outwardly it seemed but a little hill, with a few
bushes and trees growing on it.

He found also meadows and lanes, islands and lakes, where the birds
sang sweeter, and the flowers were more brilliant and fragrant than
anything he had ever seen on earth. There was a breeze, and yet one
did not feel the wind; it was quite clear and bright, but there was no
heat; the waves were dashing, still there was no danger; and the most
beautiful little barks and canoes came, like white swans, when one
wanted to cross the water, and went backwards and forwards of their
own accord. Whence all this came nobody knew, nor could his servant
tell anything about it.

These lovely meads and plains were, for the most part, all solitary.
Few of the underground people were to be seen upon them, and those
that were just glided across them, as if in the greatest hurry. It
very rarely happened that any of them danced out here in the open air;
sometimes about three of them did so; at the most half a dozen: John
never saw a greater number together. The meadows never seemed
cheerful, except when the earth-children, who were kept as servants,
were let out to walk. This, however, happened but twice a week, for
they were mostly kept employed in the great hall and adjoining
apartments, or at school.

For John soon found they had schools there also; he had been there
about ten months, when one day he saw something snow-white gliding
into a rock, and disappearing. "What!" said he to his servant, "are
there some of you too that wear white, like the servants?" He was
informed that there were; but they were few in number, and never
appeared at the large tables or the dances, except once a year, on the
birthday of the great Hill-king, who dwelt many thousand miles below
in the great deep. These were the oldest men among them, some being
many thousand years old; they knew all things, and could tell of the
beginning of the world, and were called the Wise. They lived all
alone, and only left their chambers to instruct the underground
children and the attendants of both sexes.

John was greatly interested by this news, and he determined to take
advantage of it: so next morning he made his servant conduct him to
the school, and was so well pleased with it that he never missed a
day. The scholars were taught reading, writing, and accounts, to
compose and relate histories and stories, and many elegant kinds of
work; so that many came out of the hills very prudent and learned. The
biggest, and those of best capacity, received instruction in natural
science and astronomy, and in poetry and riddle-making, arts highly
esteemed by the little people. John was very diligent, and soon became
a clever painter; he wrought, too, most ingeniously in gold, and
silver, and stones; and in verse and riddle-making he had no fellow.

John had spent many a happy year here without ever thinking of the
upper world, or of those he had left behind, so pleasantly passed the
time--so many an agreeable playfellow had he among the children.

Of all his playfellows there was none of whom he was so fond as of a
little fair-haired girl, named Elizabeth Krabbin. She was from his own
village, and was the daughter of Frederick Krabbe, the minister of
Rambin. She was but four years old when she was taken away, and John
had often heard tell of her. She was not, however, stolen by the
little people, but came into their power in this manner. One day in
summer, she, with other children, ran out into the fields: in their
rambles they went to the Nine-hills, where little Elizabeth fell
asleep, and was forgotten by the rest. At night, when she awoke, she
found herself under the ground among the little people. It was not
merely because she was from his own village that John was so fond of
Elizabeth, but she was a most beautiful child, with clear blue eyes
and ringlets of fair hair, and a most angelic smile.

Time flew away unperceived: John was now eighteen, and Elizabeth
sixteen. Their childish fondness was now become love, and the little
people were pleased to see it, thinking that by means of her they
might get John to renounce his power, and become their servant; for
they were fond of him, and would willingly have had him to wait upon
them; the love of dominion is their vice. But they were mistaken; John
had learned too much from his servant to be caught in that way.

John's chief delight was walking about alone with Elizabeth; for he
now knew every place so well that he could dispense with the
attendance of his servant. In these rambles he was always gay and
lively, but his companion was frequently sad and melancholy, thinking
of the land above, where men lived, and where the sun, moon, and stars
shine. Now it happened in one of their walks, that as they talked of
their love, and it was after midnight, they passed under the place
where the tops of the glass hills used to open and let the underground
people in and out. As they went along they heard of a sudden the
crowing of several cocks above. At this sound, which she had not heard
for twelve years, little Elizabeth felt her heart so affected that she
could contain herself no longer, but throwing her arms about John's
neck, she bathed his cheeks with her tears. At length she spake--

"Dearest John," said she, "everything down here is very beautiful, and
the little people are kind, and do nothing to injure me, but still I
have always been uneasy, nor ever felt any pleasure till I began to
love you; and yet that is not pure pleasure, for this is not a right
way of living, such as it should be for human beings. Every night I
dream of my dear father and mother, and of our church-yard, where the
people stand so piously at the church-door waiting for my father, and
I could weep tears of blood that I cannot go into the church with
them, and worship God as a human being should; for this is no
Christian life we lead down here, but a delusive half heathen one. And
only think, dear John, that we can never marry, as there is no priest
to join us. Do, then, plan some way for us to leave this place; for I
cannot tell you how I long to get once more to my father, and among
pious Christians."

John too had not been unaffected by the crowing of the cocks, and he
felt what he had never felt here before, a longing after the land
where the sun shines. He replied--

"Dear Elizabeth, all you say is true, and I now feel that it is a sin
for Christians to stay here; and it seems to me as if our Lord said to
us in that cry of the cocks, 'Come up, ye Christian children, out of
those abodes of illusion and magic; come to the light of the stars,
and act as children of light.' I now feel that it was a great sin for
me to come down here, but I trust I shall be forgiven on account of my
youth; for I was a child and knew not what I did. But now I will not
stay a day longer. They cannot keep _me_ here."

At these last words, Elizabeth turned pale, for she recollected that
she was a servant, and must serve her fifty years. "And what will it
avail me," cried she, "that I shall continue young and be but as
twenty years old when I go out, for my father and mother will be dead,
and all my companions old and gray; and you, dearest John, will be old
and gray also," cried she, throwing herself on his bosom.

John was thunderstruck at this, for it had never before occurred to
him; he, however, comforted her as well as he could, and declared he
would never leave the place without her. He spent the whole night in
forming various plans, at last he fixed on one, and in the morning he
dispatched his servant to summon to his apartment six of the principal
of the little people. When they came, John thus mildly addressed them:

"My friends, you know how I came here, not as a prisoner or servant,
but as a lord and master over one of you, and consequently, over all.
You have now for the ten years I have been with you treated me with
respect and attention, and for that I am your debtor. But you are
still more my debtors, for I might have given you every sort of
annoyance and vexation, and you must have submitted to it. I have,
however, not done so, but have behaved as your equal, and have sported
and played with you rather than ruled over you. I now have one request
to make. There is a girl among your servants whom I love, Elizabeth
Krabbin, of Rambin, where I was born. Give her to me, and let us
depart. For I will return to where the sun shines and the plough goes
through the land. I ask to take nothing with me but her, and the
ornaments and furniture of my chamber."

He spoke in a determined tone, and they hesitated and cast their eyes
to the ground; at last the eldest of them replied:

"Sir, you ask what we cannot grant. It is a fixed law, that no servant
should leave this place before the appointed time. Were we to break
through this law, our whole subterranean empire would fall. Anything
else you desire, for we love and respect you, but we cannot give up
Elizabeth."

"You can and you shall give her up," cried John in a rage; "go think
of it till to-morrow. Return here at this hour. I will show you
whether or no I can triumph over your hypocritical and cunning
stratagems."

The six retired. Next morning, on their return, John addressed them in
the kindest manner, but to no purpose; they persisted in their
refusal. He gave them till the following day, threatening them
severely in case of their still proving refractory.

Next day, when the six little people appeared before him, John looked
at them sternly, and made no reply to their salutations, but said to
them shortly, "Yes or No?" And they answered with one voice, "No." He
then ordered his servant to summon twenty-four more of the principal
persons, with their wives and children. When they came, they were in
all five hundred men, women, and children. John ordered them forthwith
to go and fetch pickaxes, spades, and bars, which they did in a
second.

He now led them out to a rock in one of the fields, and ordered them
to fall to work at blasting, hewing, and dragging stones. They toiled
patiently, and made as if it was only sport to them. From morning till
night their taskmaster made them labour without ceasing, standing over
them constantly, to prevent their resting. Still their obstinacy was
inflexible; and at the end of some weeks his pity for them was so
great, that he was obliged to give over.

He now thought of a new species of punishment for them. He ordered
them to appear before him next morning, each provided with a new whip.
They obeyed, and John commanded them to strip and lash one another
till the blood should run down on the ground, while he stood looking
on as grim and cruel as an Eastern tyrant. Still the little people cut
and slashed themselves, and mocked at John, and refused to comply with
his wishes. This he did for three or four days.

Several other courses did he try, but all in vain; his temper was too
gentle to struggle with their obstinacy, and he began now to despair
of ever accomplishing his dearest wish. He began to hate the little
people whom he was before so fond of; he kept away from their banquets
and dances, associated only with Elizabeth, and ate and drank quite
solitary in his chamber. In short, he became almost a perfect hermit,
and sank into moodiness and melancholy.

While in this temper, as he was taking a solitary walk in the evening,
and, to divert his melancholy, was flinging the stones that lay in his
path against each other, he happened to break a tolerably large one,
and out of it jumped a toad. The moment John saw the ugly animal, he
caught him up in ecstasy, and put him into his pocket and ran home,
crying, "Now I have her! I have my Elizabeth! Now you shall catch it,
you little mischievous rascals!" And on getting home he put the toad
into a costly silver casket, as if it was the greatest treasure.

To account for John's joy you must know Klas Starkwolt had often told
him that the underground people could not endure any ill odour, and
that the sight or even the smell of a toad made them faint and suffer
the most dreadful tortures, so that, by means of these animals, one
could compel them to anything. Hence there are no bad smells to be
found in the whole glass empire, and a toad is a thing unheard of
there; this toad must therefore have been inclosed in the stone from
the Creation, as it were for the sake of John and Elizabeth.

Resolved to try the effect of his toad, John took the casket under his
arm and went out, and on the way he met two of the little people in a
lonesome place. The moment he approached them they fell to the ground,
and whimpered and howled most lamentably, as long as he was near them.

Satisfied now of his power, he next morning summoned the fifty
principal persons, with their wives and children, to his apartment.
When they came, he addressed them, reminding them once again of his
kindness and gentleness towards them, and of the good terms on which
they had hitherto lived together. He reproached them with their
ingratitude in refusing him the only favour he had ever asked of them,
but firmly declared he would not give way to their obstinacy.
"Wherefore," said he, "for the last time, I warn you;--think for a
minute, and if you then say No, you shall feel that pain which is to
you and your children the most terrible of all sufferings."

They did not take long to deliberate, but unanimously replied "No;"
for they thought to themselves, What new scheme has the youth hit on,
with which he thinks to frighten wise ones like us? and they smiled
when they said No. Their smiling enraged John above all, and he ran
back to where he had laid the casket with the toad, under a bush.

He was hardly come within a hundred paces of them when they all fell
to the ground as if struck with a thunderbolt, and began to howl and
whimper, and to writhe, as if suffering the most excruciating pain.
They stretched out their hands, and cried, "Have mercy! have mercy! we
feel you have a toad, and there is no escape for us. Take the odious
beast away, and we will do all you require." He let them kick a few
seconds longer, and then took the toad away. They then stood up and
felt no more pain. John let all depart but the six chief persons, to
whom he said,--

"This night, between twelve and one, Elizabeth and I will depart. Load
then for me three waggons, with gold, and silver, and precious stones.
I might, you know, take all that is in the hill, and you deserve it,
but I will be merciful. Farther, you must put all the furniture of my
chamber in two waggons, and get ready for me the handsomest
travelling-carriage that is in the hill with six black horses.
Moreover, you must set at liberty all the servants who have been so
long here that on earth they would be twenty years old and upwards,
and you must give them as much silver and gold as will make them rich
for life, and make a law that no one shall be detained here longer
than his twentieth year."

The six took the oath, and went away quite melancholy, and John buried
his toad deep in the ground. The little people laboured hard according
to his bidding. At midnight everything was out of the hill, and John
and Elizabeth got into the silver tun and were drawn up.

It was then one o'clock, and midsummer-eve, the very time that twelve
years before John had gone down into the hill. Music sounded around
them, and they saw the glass hill open, and the rays of the light of
heaven shine on them for the first time after so many years; and when
they got out they saw the streaks of dawn already in the east. Crowds
of the underground people were around them busied about the waggons.
John bade them a last farewell, waved his brown cap three times in the
air, and then flung it among them. And at the same moment he ceased to
see them; he beheld nothing but a green hill, and the well-known
bushes and fields, and heard the church-clock of Rambin strike two.
When all was still, save a few larks who were tuning their morning
songs, they both fell on their knees and worshipped God, resolving
henceforth to lead a pious and a Christian life.

When the sun rose, John and his Elizabeth, with the children whom they
had saved from the underground people, set out for Rambin. Every
well-known object that they saw awakened pleasing recollections; and
as they passed by Rodenkirchen, John recognised, among the people
that gazed at and followed them, his old friend Klas Starkwolt, the
cowherd, and his dog Speed. It was four in the morning when they
entered Rambin, and they halted in the middle of the village, about
twenty paces from the house where John was born. The whole village
poured out to gaze on these Asiatic princes; for such the old sexton,
who had in his youth been at Moscow and Constantinople, said they
were. There John saw his father and mother, and his brother Andrew,
and his sister Trine. The old minister, Krabbe, stood there too, in
his black slippers and white nightcap, gaping and staring with the
rest.

John discovered himself to his parents, and Elizabeth to hers, and the
wedding-day was soon fixed, and such a wedding was never seen before
or since in the island of Rugen; for John sent to Stralsund and
Greifswald for whole boat-loads of wine, and sugar, and coffee, and
whole herds of oxen, sheep, and pigs. The quantity of harts and roes
and hares that were shot on the occasion it were vain to attempt to
tell, or to count the fish that were caught. There was not a musician
in Rugen and Pomerania that was not engaged, for John was immensely
rich, and he wished to display his wealth.

John did not neglect his old friend Klas Starkwolt, the cowherd. He
gave him enough to make him comfortable for the rest of his days, and
insisted on his coming and staying with him as often and as long as he
wished.

After his marriage, John made a progress through the country with his
beautiful Elizabeth and they purchased towns, and villages, and
lands, until he became master of nearly half Rugen and a very
considerable portion of the country. His father, old James Dietrich,
was made a nobleman, and his brothers and sisters gentlemen and
ladies--for what cannot money do?

John and his wife spent their days in acts of piety and charity. They
built several churches, they had the blessings of every one that knew
them, and died universally lamented. It was Count John Dietrich who
built and richly endowed the present church of Rambin. He built it on
the site of his father's house, and presented to it several of the
cups and plates made by the underground people, and his own and
Elizabeth's glass shoes, in memory of what had befallen them in their
youth. But they were all taken away in the time of the great Charles
the Twelfth of Sweden, when the Russians came on the island, and the
Cossacks plundered even the churches, and took away everything.




BEAUTY AND THE BEAST.


There was once a very rich merchant, who had six children, three boys
and three girls. As he was himself a man of great sense, he spared no
expense for their education. The three daughters were all handsome,
but particularly the youngest; indeed, she was so very beautiful, that
in her childhood every one called her the Little Beauty; and being
equally lovely when she was grown up, nobody called her by any other
name, which made her sisters very jealous of her. This youngest
daughter was not only more handsome than her sisters, but also was
better tempered. The two eldest were vain of their wealth and
position. They gave themselves a thousand airs, and refused to visit
other merchants' daughters; nor would they condescend to be seen
except with persons of quality. They went every day to balls, plays,
and public walks, and always made game of their youngest sister for
spending her time in reading or other useful employments. As it was
well known that these young ladies would have large fortunes, many
great merchants wished to get them for wives; but the two eldest
always answered, that, for their parts, they had no thoughts of
marrying any one below a duke or an earl at least. Beauty had quite as
many offers as her sisters, but she always answered, with the
greatest civility, that though she was much obliged to her lovers, she
would rather live some years longer with her father, as she thought
herself too young to marry.

It happened that, by some unlucky accident, the merchant suddenly lost
all his fortune, and had nothing left but a small cottage in the
country. Upon this he said to his daughters, while the tears ran down
his cheeks, "My children, we must now go and dwell in the cottage, and
try to get a living by labour, for we have no other means of support."
The two eldest replied that they did not know how to work, and would
not leave town; for they had lovers enough who would be glad to marry
them, though they had no longer any fortune. But in this they were
mistaken; for when the lovers heard what had happened, they said, "The
girls were so proud and ill-tempered, that all we wanted was their
fortune: we are not sorry at all to see their pride brought down: let
them show off their airs to their cows and sheep." But everybody
pitied poor Beauty, because she was so sweet-tempered and kind to all,
and several gentlemen offered to marry her, though she had not a
penny; but Beauty still refused, and said she could not think of
leaving her poor father in this trouble. At first Beauty could not
help sometimes crying in secret for the hardships she was now obliged
to suffer; but in a very short time she said to herself, "All the
crying in the world will do me no good, so I will try to be happy
without a fortune."

When they had removed to their cottage, the merchant and his three
sons employed themselves in ploughing and sowing the fields, and
working in the garden. Beauty also did her part, for she rose by four
o'clock every morning, lighted the fires, cleaned the house, and got
ready the breakfast for the whole family. At first she found all this
very hard; but she soon grew quite used to it, and thought it no
hardship; indeed, the work greatly benefited her health. When she had
done, she used to amuse herself with reading, playing her music, or
singing while she spun. But her two sisters were at a loss what to do
to pass the time away: they had their breakfast in bed, and did not
rise till ten o'clock. Then they commonly walked out, but always found
themselves very soon tired; when they would often sit down under a
shady tree, and grieve for the loss of their carriage and fine
clothes, and say to each other, "What a mean-spirited poor stupid
creature our young sister is, to be so content with this low way of
life!" But their father thought differently: and loved and admired his
youngest child more than ever.

After they had lived in this manner about a year, the merchant
received a letter, which informed him that one of his richest ships,
which he thought was lost, had just come into port. This news made the
two eldest sisters almost mad with joy; for they thought they should
now leave the cottage, and have all their finery again. When they
found that their father must take a journey to the ship, the two
eldest begged he would not fail to bring them back some new gowns,
caps, rings, and all sorts of trinkets. But Beauty asked for nothing;
for she thought in herself that all the ship was worth would hardly
buy everything her sisters wished for. "Beauty," said the merchant,
"how comes it that you ask for nothing: what can I bring you, my
child?"

"Since you are so kind as to think of me, dear father," she answered,
"I should be glad if you would bring me a rose, for we have none in
our garden." Now Beauty did not indeed wish for a rose, nor anything
else, but she only said this that she might not affront her sisters;
otherwise they would have said she wanted her father to praise her for
desiring nothing. The merchant took his leave of them, and set out on
his journey; but when he got to the ship, some persons went to law
with him about the cargo, and after a deal of trouble he came back to
his cottage as poor as he had left it. When he was within thirty miles
of his home, and thinking of the joy of again meeting his children, he
lost his way in the midst of a dense forest. It rained and snowed very
hard, and, besides, the wind was so high as to throw him twice from
his horse. Night came on, and he feared he should die of cold and
hunger, or be torn to pieces by the wolves that he heard howling round
him. All at once, he cast his eyes towards a long avenue, and saw at
the end a light, but it seemed a great way off. He made the best of
his way towards it, and found that it came from a splendid palace, the
windows of which were all blazing with light. It had great bronze
gates, standing wide open, and fine court-yards, through which the
merchant passed; but not a living soul was to be seen. There were
stables too, which his poor, starved horse, less scrupulous than
himself, entered at once, and took a good meal of oats and hay. His
master then tied him up, and walked towards the entrance hall, but
still without seeing a single creature. He went on to a large
dining-parlour, where he found a good fire, and a table covered with
some very nice dishes, but only one plate with a knife and fork. As
the snow and rain had wetted him to the skin, he went up to the fire
to dry himself. "I hope," said he, "the master of the house or his
servants will excuse me, for it surely will not be long now before I
see them." He waited some time, but still nobody came: at last the
clock struck eleven, and the merchant, being quite faint for the want
of food, helped himself to a chicken, and to a few glasses of wine,
yet all the time trembling with fear. He sat till the clock struck
twelve, and then, taking courage, began to think he might as well look
about him: so he opened a door at the end of the hall, and went
through it into a very grand room, in which there was a fine bed; and
as he was feeling very weary, he shut the door, took off his clothes,
and got into it.

It was ten o'clock in the morning before he awoke, when he was amazed
to see a handsome new suit of clothes laid ready for him, instead of
his own, which were all torn and spoiled. "To be sure," said he to
himself, "this place belongs to some good fairy, who has taken pity on
my ill luck." He looked out of the window, and instead of the
snow-covered wood, where he had lost himself the previous night, he
saw the most charming arbours covered with all kinds of flowers.
Returning to the hall where he had supped, he found a breakfast table,
ready prepared. "Indeed, my good fairy," said the merchant aloud, "I
am vastly obliged to you for your kind care of me." He then made a
hearty breakfast, took his hat, and was going to the stable to pay his
horse a visit; but as he passed under one of the arbours, which was
loaded with roses, he thought of what Beauty had asked him to bring
back to her, and so he took a bunch of roses to carry home. At the
same moment he heard a loud noise, and saw coming towards him a beast,
so frightful to look at that he was ready to faint with fear.
"Ungrateful man!" said the beast in a terrible voice, "I have saved
your life by admitting you into my palace, and in return you steal my
roses, which I value more than anything I possess. But you shall atone
for your fault: you shall die in a quarter of an hour."

The merchant fell on his knees, and clasping his hands, said, "Sir, I
humbly beg your pardon: I did not think it would offend you to gather
a rose for one of my daughters, who had entreated me to bring her one
home. Do not kill me, my lord!"

"I am not a lord, but a beast," replied the monster; "I hate false
compliments: so do not fancy that you can coax me by any such ways.
You tell me that you have daughters; now I suffer you to escape, if
one of them will come and die in your stead. If not, promise that you
will yourself return in three months, to be dealt with as I may
choose."

The tender-hearted merchant had no thoughts of letting any one of his
daughters die for his sake; but he knew that if he seemed to accept
the beast's terms, he should at least have the pleasure of seeing them
once again. So he gave his promise, and was told he might then set off
as soon as he liked. "But," said the beast, "I do not wish you to go
back empty-handed. Go to the room you slept in, and you will find a
chest there; fill it with whatsoever you like best, and I will have it
taken to your own house for you."

When the beast had said this, he went away. The good merchant, left to
himself, began to consider that as he must die--for he had no thought
of breaking a promise, made even to a beast--he might as well have the
comfort of leaving his children provided for. He returned to the room
he had slept in, and found there heaps of gold pieces lying about. He
filled the chest with them to the very brim, locked it, and, mounting
his horse, left the palace as sorrowful as he had been glad when he
first beheld it. The horse took a path across the forest of his own
accord, and in a few hours they reached the merchant's house. His
children came running round him, but, instead of kissing them with
joy, he could not help weeping as he looked at them. He held in his
hand the bunch of roses, which he gave to Beauty saying, "Take these
roses, Beauty; but little do you think how dear they have cost your
poor father;" and then he gave them an account of all that he had seen
or heard in the palace of the beast.

The two eldest sisters now began to shed tears, and to lay the blame
upon Beauty, who, they said, would be the cause of her father's death.
"See," said they, "what happens from the pride of the little wretch;
why did not she ask for such things as we did? But, to be sure, Miss
must not be like other people; and though she will be the cause of her
father's death, yet she does not shed a tear."

"It would be useless," replied Beauty, "for my father shall not die.
As the beast will accept of one of his daughters, I will give myself
up, and be only too happy to prove my love for the best of fathers."

"No, sister," said the three brothers with one voice, "that cannot be;
we will go in search of this monster, and either he or we will
perish."

"Do not hope to kill him," said the merchant, "his power is far too
great. But Beauty's young life shall not be sacrificed: I am old, and
cannot expect to live much longer; so I shall but give up a few years
of my life, and shall only grieve for the sake of my children."

"Never, father!" cried Beauty: "If you go back to the palace, you
cannot hinder my going after you; though young, I am not over-fond of
life; and I would much rather be eaten up by the monster, than die of
grief for your loss."

The merchant in vain tried to reason with Beauty, who still
obstinately kept to her purpose; which, in truth, made her two sisters
glad, for they were jealous of her, because everybody loved her.

The merchant was so grieved at the thoughts of losing his child, that
he never once thought of the chest filled with gold, but at night, to
his great surprise, he found it standing by his bedside. He said
nothing about his riches to his eldest daughters, for he knew very
well it would at once make them want to return to town; but he told
Beauty his secret, and she then said, that while he was away, two
gentlemen had been on a visit at their cottage, who had fallen in love
with her two sisters. She entreated her father to marry them without
delay, for she was so sweet-natured, she only wished them to be happy.

Three months went by, only too fast, and then the merchant and Beauty
got ready to set out for the palace of the beast. Upon this, the two
sisters rubbed their eyes with an onion, to make believe they were
crying; both the merchant and his sons cried in earnest. Only Beauty
shed no tears. They reached the palace in a very few hours, and the
horse, without bidding, went into the same stable as before. The
merchant and Beauty walked towards the large hall, where they found a
table covered with every dainty, and two plates laid ready. The
merchant had very little appetite; but Beauty, that she might the
better hide her grief, placed herself at the table, and helped her
father; she then began to eat herself, and thought all the time that,
to be sure, the beast had a mind to fatten her before he ate her up,
since he had provided such good cheer for her. When they had done
their supper, they heard a great noise, and the good old man began to
bid his poor child farewell, for he knew it was the beast coming to
them. When Beauty first saw that frightful form, she was very much
terrified, but tried to hide her fear. The creature walked up to her,
and eyed her all over--then asked her in a dreadful voice if she had
come quite of her own accord.

"Yes," said Beauty.

"Then you are a good girl, and I am very much obliged to you."

This was such an astonishingly civil answer that Beauty's courage
rose: but it sank again when the beast, addressing the merchant,
desired him to leave the palace next morning, and never return to it
again. "And so good night, merchant. And good night, Beauty."

"Good night, beast," she answered, as the monster shuffled out of the
room.

"Ah! my dear child," said the merchant, kissing his daughter, "I am
half dead already, at the thought of leaving you with this dreadful
beast; you shall go back and let me stay in your place."

"No," said Beauty, boldly, "I will never agree to that; you must go
home to-morrow morning."

They then wished each other good night, and went to bed, both of them
thinking they should not be able to close their eyes; but as soon as
ever they had lain down, they fell into a deep sleep, and did not
awake till morning. Beauty dreamed that a lady came up to her, who
said, "I am very much pleased, Beauty, with the goodness you have
shown, in being willing to give your life to save that of your father.
Do not be afraid of anything; you shall not go without a reward."

As soon as Beauty awoke, she told her father this dream; but though it
gave him some comfort, he was a long time before he could be persuaded
to leave the palace. At last Beauty succeeded in getting him safely
away.

When her father was out of sight, poor Beauty began to weep sorely;
still, having naturally a courageous spirit, she soon resolved not to
make her sad case still worse by sorrow, which she knew was vain, but
to wait and be patient. She walked about to take a view of all the
palace, and the elegance of every part of it much charmed her.

But what was her surprise, when she came to a door on which was
written, BEAUTY'S ROOM! She opened it in haste, and her eyes were
dazzled by the splendour and taste of the apartment. What made her
wonder more than all the rest, was a large library filled with books,
a harpsichord, and many pieces of music. "The beast surely does not
mean to eat me up immediately," said she, "since he takes care I shall
not be at a loss how to amuse myself." She opened the library and saw
these verses written in letters of gold on the back of one of the
books:--

    "Beauteous lady, dry your tears,
    Here's no cause for sighs or fears.
    Command as freely as you may,
    For you command and I obey."

"Alas!" said she, sighing; "I wish I could only command a sight of my
poor father, and to know what he is doing at this moment." Just then,
by chance, she cast her eyes on a looking-glass that stood near her,
and in it she saw a picture of her old home, and her father riding
mournfully up to the door. Her sisters came out to meet him, and
although they tried to look sorry, it was easy to see that in their
hearts they were very glad. In a short time all this picture
disappeared, but it caused Beauty to think that the beast, besides
being very powerful, was also very kind. About the middle of the day
she found a table laid ready for her, and a sweet concert of music
played all the time she was dining, without her seeing anybody. But at
supper, when she was going to seat herself at table, she heard the
noise of the beast, and could not help trembling with fear.

"Beauty," said he, "will you give me leave to see you sup?"

"That is as you please," answered she, very much afraid.

"Not in the least," said the beast; "you alone command in this place.
If you should not like my company, you need only say so, and I will
leave you that moment. But tell me, Beauty, do you not think me very
ugly?"

"Why, yes," said she, "for I cannot tell a falsehood; but then I think
you are very good."

"Am I?" sadly replied the beast; "yet, besides being ugly, I am also
very stupid: I know well enough that I am but a beast."

"Very stupid people," said Beauty, "are never aware of it themselves."

At which kindly speech the beast looked pleased, and replied, not
without an awkward sort of politeness, "Pray do not let me detain you
from supper, and be sure that you are well served. All you see is your
own, and I should be deeply grieved if you wanted for any thing."

"You are very kind--so kind that I almost forgot you are so ugly,"
said Beauty, earnestly.

"Ah! yes," answered the beast, with a great sigh; "I hope I am
good-tempered, but still I am only a monster."

"There is many a monster who wears the form of a man; it is better of
the two to have the heart of a man and the form of a monster."

"I would thank you, Beauty, for this speech, but I am too senseless to
say anything that would please you," returned the beast in a
melancholy voice; and altogether he seemed so gentle and so unhappy,
that Beauty, who had the tenderest heart in the world, felt her fear
of him gradually vanish.

She ate her supper with a good appetite, and conversed in her own
sensible and charming way, till at last, when the beast rose to
depart, he terrified her more than ever by saying abruptly, in his
gruff voice, "Beauty, will you marry me!"

Now Beauty, frightened as she was, would speak only the exact truth;
besides, her father had told her that the beast liked only to have
the truth spoken to him. So she answered, in a very firm tone, "No,
beast."

He did not go into a passion, or do anything but sigh deeply, and
depart.

When Beauty found herself alone, she began to feel pity for the poor
beast. "Oh!" said she, "what a sad thing it is that he should be so
very frightful, since he is so good-tempered!"

Beauty lived three months in this palace very well pleased. The beast
came to see her every night, and talked with her while she supped; and
though what he said was not very clever, yet, as she saw in him every
day some new goodness, instead of dreading the time of his coming, she
soon began continually looking at her watch, to see if it were nine
o'clock; for that was the hour when he never failed to visit her. One
thing only vexed her, which was that every night before he went away,
he always made it a rule to ask her if she would be his wife, and
seemed very much grieved at her steadfastly replying "No." At last,
one night, she said to him, "You wound me greatly, beast, by forcing
me to refuse you so often; I wish I could take such a liking to you as
to agree to marry you: but I must tell you plainly, that I do not
think it will ever happen. I shall always be your friend; so try to
let that content you."

"I must," sighed the beast, "for I know well enough how frightful I
am; but I love you better than myself. Yet I think I am very lucky in
your being pleased to stay with me: now promise me, Beauty, that you
will never leave me."

Beauty would almost have agreed to this, so sorry was she for him, but
she had that day seen in her magic glass, which she looked at
constantly, that her father was dying of grief for her sake.

"Alas!" she said, "I long so much to see my father, that if you do not
give me leave to visit him, I shall break my heart."

"I would rather break mine, Beauty," answered the beast; "I will send
you to your father's cottage: you shall stay there, and your poor
beast shall die of sorrow."

"No," said Beauty, crying, "I love you too well to be the cause of
your death; I promise to return in a week. You have shown me that my
sisters are married, and my brothers are gone for soldiers, so that my
father is left all alone. Let me stay a week with him."

"You shall find yourself with him to-morrow morning," replied the
beast; "but mind, do not forget your promise. When you wish to return,
you have nothing to do but to put your ring on a table when you go to
bed. Good-bye, Beauty!" The beast sighed as he said these words, and
Beauty went to bed very sorry to see him so much grieved. When she
awoke in the morning, she found herself in her father's cottage. She
rang a bell that was at her bedside, and a servant entered; but as
soon as she saw Beauty, the woman gave a loud shriek; upon which the
merchant ran upstairs, and when he beheld his daughter he ran to her,
and kissed her a hundred times. At last Beauty began to remember that
she had brought no clothes with her to put on; but the servant told
her she had just found in the next room a large chest full of dresses,
trimmed all over with gold, and adorned with pearls and diamonds.

Beauty, in her own mind, thanked the beast for his kindness, and put
on the plainest gown she could find among them all. She then desired
the servant to lay the rest aside, for she intended to give them to
her sisters; but, as soon as she had spoken these words, the chest was
gone out of sight in a moment. Her father then suggested, perhaps the
beast chose for her to keep them all for herself: and as soon as he
had said this, they saw the chest standing again in the same place.
While Beauty was dressing herself, a servant brought word to her that
her sisters were come with their husbands to pay her a visit. They
both lived unhappily with the gentlemen they had married. The husband
of the eldest was very handsome, but was so proud of this, that he
thought of nothing else from morning till night, and did not care a
pin for the beauty of his wife. The second had married a man of great
learning; but he made no use of it, except to torment and affront all
his friends, and his wife more than any of them. The two sisters were
ready to burst with spite when they saw Beauty dressed like a
princess, and looking so very charming. All the kindness that she
showed them was of no use; for they were vexed more than ever when she
told them how happy she lived at the palace of the beast. The
spiteful creatures went by themselves into the garden, where they
cried to think of her good fortune.

"Why should the little wretch be better off than we?" said they. "We
are much handsomer than she is."

"Sister!" said the eldest, "a thought has just come into my head: let
us try to keep her here longer than the week for which the beast gave
her leave; and then he will be so angry, that perhaps when she goes
back to him he will eat her up in a moment."

"That is well thought of," answered the other, "but to do this, we
must pretend to be very kind."

They then went to join her in the cottage, where they showed her so
much false love, that Beauty could not help crying for joy.

When the week was ended, the two sisters began to pretend such grief
at the thought of her leaving them, that she agreed to stay a week
more: but all that time Beauty could not help fretting for the sorrow
that she knew her absence would give her poor beast; for she tenderly
loved him, and much wished for his company again. Among all the grand
and clever people she saw, she found nobody who was half so sensible,
so affectionate, so thoughtful, or so kind. The tenth night of her
being at the cottage, she dreamed she was in the garden of the palace,
that the beast lay dying on a grass-plot, and with his last breath put
her in mind of her promise, and laid his death to her forsaking him.
Beauty awoke in a great fright, and burst into tears. "Am not I
wicked," said she, "to behave so ill to a beast who has shown me so
much kindness? Why will not I marry him? I am sure I should be more
happy with him than my sisters are with their husbands. He shall not
be wretched any longer on my account; for I should do nothing but
blame myself all the rest of my life."

She then rose, put her ring on the table, got into bed again, and soon
fell asleep. In the morning she with joy found herself in the palace
of the beast. She dressed herself very carefully, that she might
please him the better, and thought she had never known a day pass away
so slowly. At last the clock struck nine, but the beast did not come.
Beauty, dreading lest she might truly have caused his death, ran from
room to room, calling out, "Beast, dear beast;" but there was no
answer. At last she remembered her dream, rushed to the grass-plot,
and there saw him lying apparently dead beside the fountain.
Forgetting all his ugliness, she threw herself upon his body, and,
finding his heart still beat, she fetched some water and sprinkled it
over him, weeping and sobbing the while.

The beast opened his eyes: "You forgot your promise, Beauty, and so I
determined to die; for I could not live without you. I have starved
myself to death, but I shall die content since I have seen your face
once more."

"No, dear beast," cried Beauty, passionately, "you shall not die; you
shall live to be my husband. I thought it was only friendship I felt
for you, but now I know it was love."

The moment Beauty had spoken these words, the palace was suddenly
lighted up, and all kinds of rejoicings were heard around them, none
which she noticed, but hung over her dear beast with the utmost
tenderness. At last, unable to restrain herself, she dropped her head
over her hands, covered her eyes, and cried for joy; and, when she
looked up again, the beast was gone. In his stead she saw at her feet
a handsome, graceful young prince, who thanked her with the tenderest
expressions for having freed him from enchantment.

"But where is my poor beast? I only want him and nobody else," sobbed
Beauty.

"I am he," replied the Prince. "A wicked fairy condemned me to this
form, and forbade me to show that I had any wit or sense, till a
beautiful lady should consent to marry me. You alone, dearest Beauty,
judged me neither by my looks nor by my talents, but by my heart
alone. Take it then, and all that I have besides, for all is yours."

Beauty, full of surprise, but very happy, suffered the prince to lead
her to his palace, where she found her father and sisters, who had
been brought there by the fairy-lady whom she had seen in a dream the
first night she came.

"Beauty," said the fairy, "you have chosen well, and you have your
reward, for a true heart is better than either good looks or clever
brains. As for you, ladies," and she turned to the two elder sisters,
"I know all your ill deeds, but I have no worse punishment for you
than to see your sister happy. You shall stand as statues at the door
of her palace, and when you repent of and have amended your faults,
you shall become women again. But, to tell you the truth, I very much
fear you will remain statues for ever."




LITTLE ONE EYE, LITTLE TWO EYES,

AND

Little Three Eyes.


There was a woman who had three daughters, the eldest of whom was
called Little One Eye, because she had only one eye in the middle of
her forehead; the second, Little Two Eyes, because she had two eyes
like other people; and the youngest, Little Three Eyes, because she
had three eyes, one of them being also in the middle of the forehead.
But because Little Two Eyes looked no different from other people, her
sisters and mother could not bear her. They said, "You with your two
eyes are no better than anybody else; you do not belong to us." They
knocked her about, and gave her shabby clothes, and food which was
left over from their own meals; in short, they vexed her whenever they
could.

It happened that Little Two Eyes had to go out into the fields to look
after the goat; but she was still quite hungry, because her sisters
had given her so little to eat. She sat down on a hillock and began to
cry, and cried so much that two little streams ran down out of each
eye. And as she looked up once in her sorrow, a woman stood near her,
who asked, "Little Two Eyes, why do you cry?"

Little Two Eyes answered, "Have I not need to cry? Because I have two
eyes, like other people, my sisters and my mother cannot bear me; they
push me out of one corner into the other, give me shabby clothes, and
nothing to eat but what they leave. To-day they have given me so
little that I am still quite hungry."

The wise woman said, "Little Two Eyes, dry your tears, and I will tell
you something which will keep you from ever being hungry more. Only
say to your goat, 'Little goat, bleat; little table, rise,' and a
neatly-laid table will stand before you with the most delicious food
on it, so that you can eat as much as you like. And when you are
satisfied and do not want the table any more, only say, 'Little goat,
bleat; little table, away,' and it will all disappear before your
eyes." Then the wise woman went out of sight.

Little Two Eyes thought, "I must try directly if it is true what she
has said, for I am much too hungry to wait." So she said, "Little
goat, bleat; little table, rise;" and scarcely had she uttered the
words, when there stood before her a little table, covered with a
white cloth, on which was laid a plate, knife and fork, and silver
spoon. The most delicious food was there also, and smoking hot, as if
just come from the kitchen. Then Little Two Eyes said the shortest
grace that she knew, "Lord God, be our guest at all times.--Amen,"
began to eat, and found it very good. And when she had had enough, she
said as the wise woman had taught her--"Little goat, bleat; little
table, away." In an instant the little table, and all that stood on
it, had disappeared again. "That is a beautiful, easy way of
housekeeping," thought Little Two Eyes, and was quite happy and merry.

In the evening, when she came home with her goat, she found a little
earthen dish with food, which her sisters had put aside for her, but
she did not touch anything--she had no need. On the next day she went
out again with her goat, and let the few crusts that were given her
remain uneaten. The first time and the second time the sisters took no
notice; but when the same thing happened every day, they remarked it,
and said, "All is not right with Little Two Eyes; she always leaves
her food, and she used formerly to eat up everything that was given
her; she must have found other ways of dining."

In order to discover the truth, they resolved that Little One Eye
should go with Little Two Eyes when she drove the goat into the
meadow, and see what she did there, and whether anybody brought her
anything to eat and drink. So when Little Two Eyes set out again,
Little One Eye came to her and said, "I will go with you into the
field, and see that the goat is taken proper care of, and driven to
good pasture."

But Little Two Eyes saw what Little One Eye had in her mind, and drove
the goat into long grass, saying, "Come, Little One Eye, we will sit
down; I will sing you something." Little One Eye sat down, being tired
from the unusual walk and from the heat of the sun, and Little Two
Eyes kept on singing, "Are you awake, Little One Eye? Are you asleep,
Little One Eye?" Then Little One Eye shut her one eye, and fell
asleep. And when Little Two Eyes saw that Little One Eye was fast
asleep, and could not betray anything, she said, "Little goat, bleat;
little table, rise," and sat herself at her table, and ate and drank
till she was satisfied; then she called out again, "Little goat,
bleat; little table, away," and instantly everything disappeared.

Little Two Eyes now woke Little One Eye, and said, "Little One Eye,
you pretend to watch, and fall asleep over it, and in the meantime the
goat could have run all over the world; come, we will go home." Then
they went home, and Little Two Eyes let her little dish again stand
untouched; and Little One Eye, who could not tell the mother why her
sister would not eat, said, as an excuse, "Oh, I fell asleep out
there."

The next day the mother said to Little Three Eyes, "This time you
shall go and see if Little Two Eyes eats out of doors, and if anyone
brings her food and drink, for she must eat and drink secretly."

Then Little Three Eyes went to Little Two Eyes, and said, "I will go
with you and see whether the goat is taken proper care of, and driven
to good pasture." But Little Two Eyes saw what Little Three Eyes had
in her mind, and drove the goat into long grass, and said as before,
"We will sit down here, Little Three Eyes; I will sing you
something." Little Three Eyes seated herself, being tired from the
walk and the heat of the sun, and Little Two Eyes began the same song
again, and sang, "Are you awake, Little Three Eyes?" But instead of
singing then as she should, "Are you asleep, Little _Three_ Eyes?" she
sang, through carelessness, "Are you asleep, Little _Two_ Eyes?" and
went on singing, "Are you awake, Little Three Eyes? Are you asleep,
Little _Two_ Eyes?" So the two eyes of Little Three Eyes fell asleep,
but the third did not go to sleep, because it was not spoken to by the
verse. Little Three Eyes, to be sure, shut it, and made believe to go
to sleep, but only through slyness; for she winked with it, and could
see everything quite well. And when Little Two Eyes thought that
Little Three Eyes was fast asleep, she said her little sentence,
"Little goat, bleat; little table, rise," ate and drank heartily, and
then told the little table to go away again, "Little goat, bleat;
little table away." But Little Three Eyes had seen everything. Then
Little Two Eyes came to her, woke her, and said, "Ah! Little Three
Eyes, have you been asleep? you keep watch well! come, we will go
home." And when they got home, Little Two Eyes again did not eat, and
Little Three Eyes said to the mother, "I know why the proud thing does
not eat: when she says to the goat out there, 'Little goat, bleat;
little table, rise,' there stands a table before her, which is covered
with the very best food, much better than we have here; and when she
is satisfied, she says, 'Little goat, bleat; little table away,' and
everything is gone again; I have seen it all exactly. She put two of
my eyes to sleep with her little verse, but the one on my forehead
luckily remained awake."

Then the envious mother cried out, "Shall she be better off than we
are?" fetched a butcher's knife and stuck it into the goat's heart, so
that it fell down dead.

When Little Two Eyes saw that, she went out full of grief, seated
herself on a hillock, and wept bitter tears. All at once the wise
woman stood near her again, and said, "Little Two Eyes, why do you
cry?"

"Shall I not cry?" answered she. "The goat who every day, when I said
your little verse, laid the table so beautifully, has been killed by
my mother; now I must suffer hunger and thirst again."

The wise woman said, "Little Two Eyes, I will give you some good
advice; beg your sisters to give you the heart of the murdered goat,
and bury it in the ground before the house-door, and it will turn out
lucky for you." Then she disappeared, and Little Two Eyes went home
and said to her sisters, "Dear sisters, give me some part of my goat;
I don't ask for anything good, only give me the heart."

Then they laughed and said, "You can have that, if you do not want
anything else." Little Two Eyes took the heart, and buried it quietly
in the evening before the house-door, after the advice of the wise
woman.

Next morning, when the sisters woke, and went to the house-door
together, there stood a most wonderful splendid tree, with leaves of
silver, and fruit of gold hanging between them. Nothing more beautiful
or charming could be seen in the wide world. But they did not know how
the tree had come there in the night. Little Two Eyes alone noticed
that it had grown out of the heart of the goat, for it stood just
where she had buried it in the ground.

Then the mother said to Little One Eye, "Climb up, my child, and
gather us some fruit from the tree."

Little One Eye climbed up, but when she wanted to seize a golden
apple, the branch sprang out of her hand; this happened every time, so
that she could not gather a single apple, though she tried as much as
she could.

Then the mother said, "Little Three Eyes, do you climb up; you can see
better about you with your three eyes than Little One Eye can."

Little One Eye scrambled down, and Little Three Eyes climbed up. But
Little Three Eyes was no cleverer, and might look about her as much as
she liked--the golden apples always sprang back from her grasp. At
last the mother became impatient, and climbed up herself, but could
touch the fruit just as little as Little One Eye or Little Three Eyes;
she always grasped the empty air.

Then Little Two Eyes said, "I will go up myself; perhaps I shall
prosper better."

"You!" cried the sisters. "With your two eyes, what can you do?"

But Little Two Eyes climbed up and the golden apples did not spring
away from her, but dropped of themselves into her hand, so that she
could gather one after the other, and brought down a whole apron full.
Her mother took them from her, and instead of her sisters, Little One
Eye and Little Three Eyes, behaving better to poor Little Two Eyes for
it, they were only envious because she alone could get the fruit, and
behaved still more cruelly to her.

It happened, as they stood together by the tree, one day, that a young
knight came by.

"Quick, Little Two Eyes," cried the two sisters, "creep under, so that
we may not be ashamed of you," and threw over poor Little Two Eyes, in
a great hurry, an empty cask that stood just by the tree, and pushed
also beside her the golden apples which she had broken off.

Now, as the knight came nearer, he proved to be a handsome prince, who
stood still, admired the beautiful tree of gold and silver, and said
to the two sisters--

"To whom does this beautiful tree belong? She who gives me a branch of
it shall have whatever she wishes."

Then Little One Eye and Little Three Eyes answered that the tree was
theirs, and they would break off a branch for him. They both of them
gave themselves a great deal of trouble, but it was no use, for the
branches and fruit sprang back from them every time. Then the knight
said--

"It is very wonderful that the tree belongs to you, and yet you have
not the power of gathering anything from it."

They insisted, however, that the tree was their own property. But as
they spoke, Little Two Eyes rolled a few golden apples from under the
cask, so that they ran to the feet of the knight; for Little Two Eyes
was angry that Little One Eye and Little Three Eyes did not tell the
truth.

When the knight saw the apples he was astonished, and asked where they
came from. Little One Eye and Little Three Eyes answered that they had
another sister, who might not, however, show herself, because she had
only two eyes, like other common people. But the knight desired to see
her, and called out, "Little Two Eyes, come out." Then Little Two Eyes
came out of the cask quite comforted, and the knight was astonished at
her great beauty, and said--

"You, Little Two Eyes, can certainly gather me a branch from the
tree?"

"Yes," answered Little Two Eyes, "I can do that, for the tree belongs
to me." And she climbed up and easily broke off a branch, with its
silver leaves and golden fruit, and handed it to the knight.

Then the knight said, "Little Two Eyes, what shall I give you for it?"

"Oh," answered Little Two Eyes, "I suffer hunger and thirst, sorrow
and want, from early morning till late evening; if you would take me
with you and free me, I should be happy."

Then the knight lifted Little Two Eyes on to his horse, and took her
home to his paternal castle; there he gave her beautiful clothes,
food, and drink as much as she wanted, and because he loved her so
much he married her, and the marriage was celebrated with great joy.

Now, when Little Two Eyes was taken away by the handsome knight, the
two sisters envied her very much her happiness. "The wonderful tree
remains for us, though," thought they; "and even though we cannot
gather any fruit off it, every one will stand still before it, come to
us, and praise it." But the next morning the tree had disappeared, and
all their hopes with it.

Little Two Eyes lived happy a long time. Once two poor women came to
her at the castle and begged alms. Then Little Two Eyes looked in
their faces and recognised her sisters, Little One Eye and Little
Three Eyes, who had fallen into such poverty that they had to wander
about, and seek their bread from door to door. Little Two Eyes,
however, bade them welcome, and was very good to them, and took care
of them; for they both repented from their hearts the evil they had
done to their sister in their youth.




JACK THE GIANT-KILLER.


In the reign of the famous King Arthur, there lived, near the Land's
End of England, in the county of Cornwall, a worthy farmer, who had an
only son named Jack. Jack was a boy of a bold temper; he took pleasure
in hearing or reading stories of wizards, conjurors, giants, and
fairies; and used to listen eagerly while his father talked of the
great deeds of the brave knights of King Arthur's Round Table. When
Jack was sent to take care of the sheep and oxen in the fields, he
used to amuse himself with planning battles, sieges, and the means to
conquer or surprise a foe. He was above the common sports of children,
but hardly any one could equal him at wrestling; or, if he met with a
match for himself in strength, his skill and address always made him
the victor. In those days there lived on St. Michael's Mount, of
Cornwall, which rises out of the sea at some distance from the
mainland, a huge giant. He was eighteen feet high, and three yards
round; and his fierce and savage looks were the terror of all his
neighbors. He dwelt in a gloomy cavern on the very top of the
mountain, and used to wade over to the mainland in search of his prey.
When he came near, the people left their houses; and, after he had
glutted his appetite upon their cattle, he would throw half a dozen
oxen upon his back, and tie three times as many sheep and hogs round
his waist, and so march back to his own abode. The giant had done this
for many years, and the coast of Cornwall was greatly hurt by his
thefts, when Jack boldly resolved to destroy him. He therefore took a
horn, a shovel, a pickaxe, and a dark lantern, and, early in a long
winter's evening, he swam to the Mount. There he fell to work at once,
and before morning he had dug a pit twenty-two feet deep, and almost
as many broad. He covered it over with sticks and straw, and strewed
some of the earth over them, to make it look just like solid ground.
He then put his horn to his mouth, and blew such a loud and long
tantivy, that the giant awoke, and came towards Jack, roaring like
thunder: "You saucy villain, you shall pay dearly for breaking my
rest; I will broil you for my breakfast." He had scarcely spoken these
words, when he came advancing one step further; but then he tumbled
headlong into the pit, and his fall shook the very mountain.

"O ho, Mr. Giant!" said Jack, looking into the pit, "have you found
your way so soon to the bottom? How is your appetite now? Will nothing
serve you for breakfast this cold morning but broiling poor Jack?"

The giant now tried to rise, but Jack struck him a blow on the crown
of the head with his pickaxe, which killed him at once. Jack then made
haste back, to rejoice his friends with the news of the giant's
death. When the justices of Cornwall heard of this valiant action,
they sent for Jack, and declared that he should always be called Jack
the Giant Killer; and they also gave him a sword and belt, upon which
was written, in letters of gold:--

    "This is the valiant Cornishman
    Who slew the giant Cormoran."

The news of Jack's exploits soon spread over the western parts of
England: and another giant, called Old Blunderbore, vowed to have
revenge on Jack, if it should ever be his fortune to get him into his
power. The giant kept an enchanted castle in the midst of a lonely
wood. About four months after the death of Cormoran, as Jack was
taking a journey into Wales, he passed through this wood; and, as he
was very weary, he sat down to rest by the side of a pleasant
fountain, and there he fell into a deep sleep. The giant came to the
fountain for water just at this time, and found Jack there; and as the
lines on Jack's belt showed who he was, the giant lifted him up and
laid him gently upon his shoulder, to carry him to his castle; but, as
he passed through the thicket, the rustling of the leaves waked Jack;
and he was sadly afraid when he found himself in the clutches of
Blunderbore. Yet this was nothing to his fright soon after; for, when
they reached the castle, he beheld the floor covered all over with the
skulls and bones of men and women. The giant took him into a large
room, where lay the hearts and limbs of persons who had been lately
killed; and he told Jack, with a horrid grin, that men's hearts, eaten
with pepper and vinegar, were his nicest food, and also, that he
thought he should make a dainty meal on his heart. When he had said
this, he locked Jack up in that room, while he went to fetch another
giant, who lived in the same wood, to enjoy a dinner off Jack's flesh
with him. While he was away, Jack heard dreadful shrieks, groans, and
cries from many parts of the castle; and soon after he heard a
mournful voice repeat these lines:--

    "Haste, valiant stranger, haste away,
    Lest you become the giant's prey.
    On his return he'll bring another,
    Still more savage than his brother;
    A horrid, cruel monster, who,
    Before he kills, will torture you.
    Oh valiant stranger! haste away,
    Or you'll become these giants' prey."

This warning was so shocking to poor Jack, that he was ready to go
mad. He ran to the window, and saw the two giants coming along arm in
arm. This window was right over the gates of the castle. "Now,"
thought Jack, "either my death or freedom is at hand."

There were two strong cords in the room. Jack made a large noose, with
a slip-knot at the ends of both these, and, as the giants were coming
through the gates, he threw the ropes over their heads. He then made
the other ends fast to a beam in the ceiling, and pulled with all his
might, till he had almost strangled them. When he saw that they were
both quite black in the face, and had not the least strength left, he
drew his sword, and slid down the ropes; he then killed the giants,
and thus saved himself from a cruel death. Jack next took a great
bunch of keys from the pocket of Blunderbore, and went into the castle
again. He made a strict search through all the rooms, and in them
found three ladies tied up by the hair of their heads, and almost
starved to death. They told him that their husbands had been killed by
the giants, who had then condemned them to be starved to death,
because they would not eat the flesh of their own dead husbands.

"Ladies," said Jack, "I have put an end to the monster and his wicked
brother; and I give you this castle and all the riches it contains, to
make you some amends for the dreadful pains you have felt." He then
very politely gave them the keys of the castle, and went further on
his journey to Wales.

As Jack had not taken any of the giant's riches for himself, and had
very little money of his own, he thought it best to travel as fast as
he could. At length he lost his way; and, when night came on, he was
in a lonely valley between two lofty mountains. There he walked about
for some hours, without seeing any dwelling-place, so he thought
himself very lucky at last in finding a large and handsome house. He
went up to it boldly, and knocked loudly at the gate; when, to his
great terror and surprise, there came forth a monstrous giant with two
heads. He spoke to Jack very civilly, for he was a Welsh giant, and
all the mischief he did was by private and secret malice, under the
show of friendship and kindness. Jack told him that he was a traveller
who had lost his way, on which the huge monster made him welcome, and
led him into a room, where there was a good bed in which to pass the
night. Jack took off his clothes quickly; but though he was so weary,
he could not go to sleep. Soon after this, he heard the giant walking
backward and forward in the next room, and saying to himself:--

    "Though here you lodge with me this night,
    You shall not see the morning light;
    My club shall dash your brains out quite."

"Say you so?" thought Jack. "Are these your tricks upon travellers?
But I hope to prove as cunning as you." Then getting out of bed, he
groped about the room, and at last found a large thick billet of wood;
he laid it in his own place in the bed, and hid himself in a dark
corner of the room. In the middle of the night the giant came with his
great club, and struck many heavy blows on the bed, in the very place
where Jack had laid the billet, and then he went back to his own room,
thinking he had broken all his bones. Early in the morning, Jack put a
bold face upon the matter, and walked into the giant's room to thank
him for his lodging.

The giant started when he saw him, and he began to stammer out, "Oh,
dear me! is it you? Pray how did you sleep last night? Did you hear or
see anything in the dead of the night?"

"Nothing worth speaking of," said Jack, carelessly; "a rat, I
believe, gave me three or four slaps with his tail, and disturbed me a
little, but I soon went to sleep again."

The giant wondered more and more at this; yet he did not answer a
word, and went to bring two great bowls of hasty-pudding for their
breakfast.

Jack wished to make the giant believe that he could eat as much as
himself; so he contrived to button a leathern bag inside his coat, and
slipped the hasty-pudding into this bag, while he seemed to put it
into his mouth. When breakfast was over, he said to the giant, "Now I
will show you a fine trick; I can cure all wounds with a touch; I
could cut off my head one minute, and the next put it sound again on
my shoulders: you shall see an example." He then took hold of the
knife, ripped up the leathern bag, and all the hasty-pudding tumbled
out upon the floor.

"Ods splutter hur nails," cried the Welsh giant, who was ashamed to be
outdone by such a little fellow as Jack; "hur can do that hurself." So
he snatched up the knife, plunged it into his stomach, and in a moment
dropped down dead.

As soon as Jack had thus tricked the Welsh monster, he went farther on
his journey; and, a few days after, he met with King Arthur's only
son, who had got his father's leave to travel into Wales, to deliver a
beautiful lady from the power of a wicked magician, by whom she was
held in enchantment. When Jack found that the young prince had no
servants with him, he begged leave to attend him; and the prince at
once agreed to this, and gave Jack many thanks for his kindness.

King Arthur's son was a handsome, polite, and brave knight, and so
good-natured, that he gave money to everybody he met. At length he
gave his last penny to an old woman, and then turned to Jack, "How
shall we be able to get food for ourselves the rest of our journey?"

"Leave that to me, sir," replied Jack; "I will provide for my prince."

Night now came on, and the prince began to grow uneasy at thinking
where they should lodge.

"Sir," said Jack, "be of good heart; two miles further there lives a
large giant, whom I know well; he has three heads, and will fight five
hundred men, and make them fly before him."

"Alas!" cried the king's son, "we had better never have been born than
meet with such a monster."

"My lord, leave me to manage him, and wait here in quiet till I
return."

The prince now stayed behind, while Jack rode on at full speed; and
when he came to the gates of the castle, he gave a loud knock. The
giant, with a voice like thunder, roared out, "Who is there?"

Jack made answer, and said, "No one but your poor cousin Jack."

"Well," said the giant, "what news, cousin Jack?"

"Dear uncle," said Jack, "I have heavy news."

"Pooh!" said the giant, "what heavy news can come to me? I am a giant
with three heads, and can fight five hundred men, and make them fly
before me."

"Alas!" said Jack, "here's the king's son coming with two thousand men
to kill you, and to destroy the castle and all that you have."

"Oh, cousin Jack," said the giant, "this is heavy news indeed! But I
have a large cellar underground, where I will hide myself, and you
shall lock, bolt, and bar me in, and keep the keys till the king's son
is gone."

Now, when Jack had barred the giant fast in the vault, he went back
and fetched the prince to the castle; they both made themselves merry
with the wine and other dainties that were in the house. So that night
they rested very pleasantly while the poor giant lay trembling and
shaking with fear in the cellar underground. Early in the morning,
Jack gave the king's son gold and silver out of the giant's treasure,
and accompanied him three miles forward on his journey. The prince
then sent Jack to let his uncle out of the hole, who asked him what he
should give him as a reward for saving his castle.

"Why, good uncle," said Jack, "I desire nothing but the old coat and
cap, with the old rusty sword and slippers, which are hanging at your
bed's head."

"Then," said the giant, "you shall have them: and pray keep them for
my sake, for they are things of great use. The coat will keep you
invisible, the cap will give you knowledge, the sword will cut
through anything, and the shoes are of vast swiftness; they may be
useful to you in all times of danger, so take them with all my heart."

Jack gave many thanks to the giant, and then set off to the prince.
When he had come up to the king's son, they soon arrived at the
dwelling of the beautiful lady, who was under the power of a wicked
magician. She received the prince very politely, and made a noble
feast for him: when it was ended, she rose, and, wiping her mouth with
a fine handkerchief, said, "My lord, you must submit to the custom of
my palace; to-morrow morning I command you to tell me on whom I bestow
this handkerchief, or lose your head." She then left the room.

The young prince went to bed very mournful, but Jack put on his cap of
knowledge, which told him that the lady was forced, by the power of
enchantment, to meet the wicked magician every night in the middle of
the forest. Jack now put on his coat of darkness, and his shoes of
swiftness, and was there before her. When the lady came, she gave the
handkerchief to the magician. Jack, with his sword of sharpness, at
one blow cut off his head; the enchantment was then ended in a moment,
and the lady was restored to her former virtue and goodness. She was
married to the prince on the next day, and soon after went back, with
her royal husband and a great company, to the court of King Arthur,
where they were received with loud and joyful welcomes; and the
valiant hero Jack, for the many great exploits he had done for the
good of his country, was made one of the knights of the Round Table.

As Jack had been so lucky in all his adventures, he resolved not to be
idle for the future, but still to do what services he could for the
honour of the king and the nation. He therefore humbly begged his
majesty to furnish him with a horse and money, that he might travel in
search of new and strange exploits. "For," said he to the king, "there
are many giants yet living in the remote parts of Wales, to the great
terror and distress of your majesty's subjects; therefore, if it
please you, sire, to favour me in my design, I will soon rid your
kingdom of these giants and monsters in human shape."

Now when the king heard this offer, and began to think of the cruel
deeds of these blood-thirsty giants and savage monsters, he gave Jack
everything proper for such a journey. After this, Jack took leave of
the king, the prince, and all the knights, and set off; taking with
him his cap of knowledge, his sword of sharpness, his shoes of
swiftness, and his invisible coat, the better to perform the great
exploits that might fall in his way. He went along over hills and
mountains; and on the third day he came to a wide forest. He had
hardly entered it, when on a sudden he heard dreadful shrieks and
cries; and forcing his way through the trees, saw a monstrous giant
dragging along by the hair of their heads, a handsome knight and a
beautiful lady. Their tears and cries melted the heart of honest
Jack; he alighted from his horse, and tying him to an oak-tree, put on
his invisible coat, under which he carried his sword of sharpness.

When he came up to the giant, he made several strokes at him, but
could not reach his body, on account of the enormous height of the
terrible creature; but he wounded his thighs in several places; and at
length, putting both hands to his sword, and aiming with all his
might, he cut off both the giant's legs just below the garter; and the
trunk of his body, tumbling to the ground, made not only the trees
shake, but the earth itself tremble with the force of his fall. Then
Jack, setting his foot upon his neck, exclaimed: "Thou barbarous and
savage wretch, behold, I come to execute upon thee the just reward for
all thy crimes;" and instantly plunged his sword into the giant's
body. The huge monster gave a groan, and yielded up his life into the
hands of the victorious Jack the Giant-Killer, whilst the noble knight
and the virtuous lady were both joyful spectators of his sudden death.
They not only returned Jack hearty thanks for their deliverance, but
also invited him to their house, to refresh himself after his dreadful
encounter, as likewise to receive a reward for his good services.

"No," said Jack, "I cannot be at ease till I find out the den that was
the monster's habitation."

The knight, on hearing this, grew very sorrowful, and replied: "Noble
stranger, it is too much to run a second hazard; this monster lived
in a den under yonder mountain, with a brother of his, more fierce and
cruel than himself; therefore, if you should go thither, and perish in
the attempt, it would be a heart-breaking thing to me and my lady; so
let me persuade you to go back with us, and desist from any further
pursuit."

"Nay," answered Jack, "if there be another, even if there were twenty,
I would shed the last drop of blood in my body before one of them
should escape. When I have finished this task, I will come and pay my
respects to you."

So when they had told him where to find them again, he got on his
horse and went after the dead giant's brother.

Jack had not ridden a mile and a half before he came in sight of the
mouth of the cavern; and, nigh the entrance of it, he saw the other
giant sitting on a huge block of timber, with a knotted iron club
lying by his side, waiting for his brother. His eyes looked like
flames of fire, his face was grim and ugly, and his cheeks were like
two flitches of bacon; the bristles of his beard seemed to be thick
rods of iron wire; and his long locks of hair hung down upon his broad
shoulders like curling snakes. Jack got down from his horse, and
turned him into a thicket; then he put on his coat of darkness, and
drew a little nearer to behold this figure, and said softly, "Oh,
monster! are you there? It will not be long before I shall take you
fast by the beard."

The giant all this while could not see him, by reason of his invisible
coat; so Jack came quite close to him, and struck a blow at his head
with his sword of sharpness; but he missed his aim, and only cut off
his nose, which made him roar like loud claps of thunder. He rolled
his glaring eyes round on every side, but could not see who had given
him the blow; so he took up his iron club, and began to lay about him
like one that was mad with pain and fury.

"Nay," said Jack, "if this be the case, I will kill you at once." So
saying, he slipped nimbly behind him, and jumping upon the block of
timber, as the giant rose from it, he stabbed him in the back; when,
after a few howls, he dropped down dead. Jack cut off his head, and
sent it, with the head of his brother, to King Arthur, by a waggon
which he had hired for that purpose. When Jack had thus killed these
two monsters, he went into their cave in search of their treasure. He
passed through many turnings and windings, which led him to a room
paved with freestone; at the end of it was a boiling cauldron, and on
the right hand stood a large table, where the giants used to dine. He
then came to a window that was secured with iron bars, through which
he saw a number of wretched captives, who cried out when they saw
Jack: "Alas! alas! young man, you are come to be one among us in this
horrid den."

"I hope," said Jack, "you will not stay here long: but pray tell me
what is the meaning of your being here at all?"

"Alas!" said one poor old man, "I will tell you, sir. We are persons
that have been taken by the giants who hold this cave, and are kept
till they choose to have a feast; then one of us is to be killed, and
cooked to please their taste. It is not long since they took three for
the same purpose."

"Well," said Jack, "I have given them such a dinner, that it will be
long enough before they have any more."

The captives were amazed at his words.

"You may believe me," said Jack, "for I have killed them both with the
edge of this sword, and have sent their large heads to the court of
King Arthur, as marks of my great success."

To show that what he said was true, he unlocked the gate, and set the
captives all free. Then he led them to the great room, placed them
round the table, and placed before them two quarters of beef, with
bread and wine; upon which they feasted their fill. When supper was
over, they searched the giant's coffers, and Jack divided among them
all the treasures. The next morning they set off to their homes, and
Jack to the knight's house, whom he had left with his lady not long
before.

He was received with the greatest joy by the thankful knight and his
lady, who, in honour of Jack's exploits, gave a grand feast, to which
all the nobles and gentry were invited. When the company were
assembled, the knight declared to them the great actions of Jack, and
gave him, as a mark of respect, a fine ring, on which was engraved the
picture of the giant dragging the knight and the lady by the hair,
with this motto round it:--

    "Behold in dire distress were we,
      Under a giant's fierce command;
    But gained our lives and liberty
      From valiant Jack's victorious hand."

Among the guests then present were five aged gentlemen, who were
fathers to some of those captives who had been freed by Jack from the
dungeon of the giants. As soon as they heard that he was the person
who had done such wonders, they pressed round him with tears of joy,
to return him thanks for the happiness he had caused them. After this
the bowl went round, and every one drank the health and long life of
the gallant hero. Mirth increased, and the hall was filled with peals
of laughter. But, on a sudden, a herald, pale and breathless, rushed
into the midst of the company, and told them that Thundel, a savage
giant with two heads, had heard of the death of his two kinsmen, and
was come to take his revenge on Jack; and that he was now within a
mile of the house, the people flying before him like chaff before the
wind. At this news the very boldest of the guests trembled; but Jack
drew his sword, and said, "Let him come, I have a rod for him also.
Pray, ladies and gentlemen, do me the favour to walk into the garden,
and you shall soon behold the giant's defeat and death."

To this they all agreed, and heartily wished him success in his
dangerous attempt.

The knight's house stood in the middle of a moat, thirty feet deep and
twenty wide, over which lay a drawbridge. Jack set men to work, to cut
the bridge on both sides, almost to the middle, and then dressed
himself in his coat of darkness, and went against the giant with his
sword of sharpness. As he came close to him, though the giant could
not see him for his invisible coat, yet he found some danger was near,
which made him cry out:--

    "Fa, fe, fi, fo, fum,
    I smell the blood of an Englishman;
    Let him be alive, or let him be dead,
    I'll grind his bones to make me bread."

"Say you so, my friend?" said Jack; "you are a monstrous miller,
indeed!"

"Art thou," cried the giant, "the villain that killed my kinsmen? Then
I will tear thee with my teeth, and grind thy bones to powder."

"You must catch me first," said Jack; and throwing off his coat of
darkness, and putting on his shoes of swiftness, he began to run, the
giant following him like a walking castle, making the earth shake at
every step.

Jack led him round and round the walls of the house, that the company
might see the monster; then, to finish the work, he ran over the
drawbridge, the giant going after him with his club: but when he came
to the middle, where the bridge had been cut on both sides, the great
weight of his body made it break, and he tumbled into the water, where
he rolled about like a large whale. Jack now stood by the side of the
moat, and laughed and jeered at him, saying, "I think you told me you
would grind my bones to powder; when will you begin?"

The giant foamed at both his horrid mouths with fury, and plunged
from side to side of the moat; but he could not get out to have
revenge on his little foe. At last Jack ordered a cart-rope to be
brought to him; he then drew it over his two heads, and by the help of
a team of horses, dragged him to the edge of the moat, where he cut
off his heads: and before he either ate or drank, sent them both to
the court of King Arthur. He then went back to the table with the
company, and the rest of the day was spent in mirth and good cheer.

After staying with the knight for some time, Jack grew weary of such
an idle life, and set out again in search of new adventures. He went
over hills and dales without meeting any, till he came to the foot of
a very high mountain. Here he knocked at the door of a small and
lonely house, and an old man, with a head as white as snow, let him
in.

"Good father," said Jack, "can you lodge a traveller who has lost his
way?"

"Yes," said the hermit, "I can, if you will accept such fare as my
poor house affords."

Jack entered, and the old man set before him some bread and fruit for
his supper. When Jack had eaten as much as he chose, the hermit said:
"My son, I know you are the famous conqueror of giants; now, at the
top of this mountain is an enchanted castle, kept by a giant named
Galligantus, who, by the help of a vile magician, gets many knights
into his castle, where he changes them into the shape of beasts. Above
all, I lament the hard fate of a duke's daughter, whom they seized as
she was walking in her father's garden, and brought hither through the
air in a chariot drawn by two fiery dragons, and turned her into the
shape of a deer. Many knights have tried to destroy the enchantment
and deliver her, yet none have been able to do it, by reason of two
fiery griffins, who guard the gate of the castle, and destroy all who
come nigh; but as you, my son, have an invisible coat, you may pass by
them without being seen; and on the gates of the castle you will find
engraved by what means the enchantment may be broken."

Jack promised that in the morning, at the risk of his life, he would
break the enchantment; and after a sound sleep, he arose early, put on
his invisible coat, and got ready for the attempt. When he had climbed
to the top of the mountain, he saw the two fiery griffins; but he
passed between them without the least fear of danger for they could
not see him because of his invisible coat. On the castle-gate he found
a golden trumpet, under which were written these lines:--

    "Whoever can this trumpet blow,
    Shall cause the giant's overthrow."

As soon as Jack had read this, he seized the trumpet, and blew a
shrill blast, which made the gates fly open, and the very castle
itself tremble. The giant and the conjuror now knew that their wicked
course was at an end, and they stood biting their thumbs and shaking
with fear. Jack with his sword of sharpness, soon killed the giant,
and the magician was then carried away by a whirlwind. All the
knights and beautiful ladies, who had been changed into birds and
beasts, returned to their proper shapes. The castle vanished away like
smoke, and the head of the giant Galligantus was sent to King Arthur.
The knights and ladies rested that night at the old man's hermitage,
and the next day they set out for the court. Jack then went up to the
king, and gave his majesty an account of all his fierce battles.
Jack's fame had spread through the whole country; and at the king's
desire, the duke gave him his daughter in marriage, to the joy of all
the kingdom. After this, the king gave him a large estate, on which he
and his lady lived the rest of their days in joy and content.




TOM THUMB.


In the days of King Arthur, Merlin, the most learned enchanter of his
time, was on a journey; and being very weary, stopped one day at the
cottage of an honest ploughman to ask for refreshment. The ploughman's
wife, with great civility, immediately brought him some milk in a
wooden bowl, and some brown bread on a wooden platter. Merlin could
not help observing, that although everything within the cottage was
particularly neat and clean, and in good order, the ploughman and his
wife had the most sorrowful air imaginable: so he questioned them on
the cause of their melancholy, and learned that they were very
miserable because they had no children. The poor woman declared, with
tears in her eyes, that she should be the happiest creature in the
world, if she had a son, although he were no bigger than his father's
thumb. Merlin was much amused with the notion of a boy no bigger than
a man's thumb; and as soon as he returned home, he sent for the queen
of the fairies (with whom he was very intimate), and related to her
the desire of the ploughman and his wife to have a son the size of his
father's thumb. She liked the plan exceedingly, and declared their
wish should be speedily granted. Accordingly, the ploughman's wife
had a son, who in a few minutes grew as tall as his father's thumb.
The queen of the fairies came in at the window as the mother was
sitting up in bed admiring the child. Her majesty kissed the infant,
and, giving it the name of Tom Thumb, immediately summoned several
fairies from Fairyland, to clothe her new little favourite:--

    "An oak-leaf hat he had for his crown,
    His shirt it was by spiders spun:
    With doublet wove of thistledown,
    His trousers up with points were done;
    His stockings, of apple-rind, they tie
    With eye-lash pluck'd from his mother's eye:
    His shoes were made of a mouse's skin,
    Nicely tann'd with hair within."

Tom was never any bigger than his father's thumb, which was not a
large thumb neither; but as he grew older, he became very cunning, for
which his mother did not sufficiently correct him: and by this ill
quality he was often brought into difficulties. For instance, when he
had learned to play with other boys for cherry-stones, and had lost
all his own, he used to creep into the boys' bags, fill his pockets,
and come out again to play. But one day as he was getting out of a bag
of cherry-stones, the boy to whom it belonged chanced to see him.

"Ah, ha, my little Tom Thumb!" said he, "have I caught you at your bad
tricks at last? Now I will reward you for thieving." Then drawing the
string tight round his neck, and shaking the bag, the cherry-stones
bruised Tom's legs, thighs, and body sadly; which made him beg to be
let out, and promise never to be guilty of such things any more.

Shortly afterwards Tom's mother was making a batter-pudding, and that
he might see how she mixed it, he climbed on the edge of the bowl; but
his foot happening to slip, he fell over head and ears into the
batter, and his mother, not observing him, stirred him into the
pudding, and popped him into the pot to boil. The hot water made Tom
kick and struggle; and his mother, seeing the pudding jump up and down
in such a furious manner, thought it was bewitched; and a tinker
coming by just at the time, she quickly gave him the pudding; he put
it into his budget, and walked on.

As soon as Tom could get the batter out of his mouth, he began to cry
aloud, which so frightened the poor tinker, that he flung the pudding
over the hedge, and ran away from it as fast as he could. The pudding
being broken to pieces by the fall, Tom was released, and walked home
to his mother, who gave him a kiss and put him to bed.

Tom Thumb's mother once took him with her when she went to milk the
cow; and it being a very windy day, she tied him with a needleful of
thread to a thistle, that he might not be blown away. The cow, liking
his oak-leaf hat, took him and the thistle up at one mouthful. While
the cow chewed the thistle, Tom, terrified at her great teeth, which
seemed ready to crush him to pieces, roared, "Mother, mother!" as loud
as he could bawl.

"Where are you, Tommy, my dear Tommy?' said the mother.

"Here, mother, here in the red cow's mouth."

The mother began to cry and wring her hands; but the cow, surprised at
such odd noises in her throat, opened her mouth and let him drop out.
His mother clapped him into her apron, and ran home with him. Tom's
father made him a whip of a barley straw to drive the cattle with, and
being one day in the field he slipped into a deep furrow. A raven
flying over picked him up with a grain of corn, and flew with him to
the top of a giant's castle by the sea-side, where he left him; and
old Grumbo, the giant, coming soon after to walk upon his terrace,
swallowed Tom like a pill, clothes and all. Tom presently made the
giant very uncomfortable, and he threw him up into the sea. A great
fish then swallowed him. This fish was soon after caught, and sent as
a present to King Arthur. When it was cut open, everybody was
delighted with little Tom Thumb. The king made him his dwarf; he was
the favourite of the whole court; and, by his merry pranks, often
amused the queen and the knights of the Round Table. The king, when he
rode on horseback, frequently took Tom in his hand; and if a shower of
rain came on, he used to creep into the king's waist-coat-pocket, and
sleep till the rain was over. The king also sometimes questioned Tom
concerning his parents; and when Tom informed his majesty they were
very poor people, the king led him into his treasury, and told him he
should pay his friends a visit, and take with him as much money as he
could carry. Tom procured a little purse, and putting a threepenny
piece into it, with much labour and difficulty got it upon his back;
and after travelling two days and nights, arrived at his father's
house. His mother met him at the door, almost tired to death, having
in forty-eight hours travelled almost half a mile with a huge silver
threepence upon his back. Both his parents were glad to see him,
especially when he had brought such an amazing sum of money with him.
They placed him in a walnut-shell by the fireside, and feasted him for
three days upon a hazel-nut, which made him sick, for a whole nut
usually served him for a month. Tom got well, but could not travel
because it had rained: therefore his mother took him in her hand, and
with one puff blew him into King Arthur's court; where Tom entertained
the king, queen, and nobility at tilts and tournaments, at which he
exerted himself so much that he brought on a fit of sickness, and his
life was despaired of. At this juncture the queen of the fairies came
in a chariot, drawn by flying mice, placed Tom by her side, and drove
through the air, without stopping till they arrived at her palace;
when, after restoring him to health and permitting him to enjoy all
the gay diversions of Fairyland, she commanded a fair wind, and,
placing Tom before it, blew him straight to the court of King Arthur.
But just as Tom should have alighted in the courtyard of the palace,
the cook happened to pass along with the king's great bowl of
furmenty (King Arthur loved furmenty), and poor Tom Thumb fell plump
into the middle of it, and splashed the hot furmenty into the cook's
eyes. Down went the bowl.

"Oh dear! oh dear!" cried Tom.

"Murder! murder!" bellowed the cook; and away poured the king's nice
furmenty into the kennel.

The cook was a red-faced, cross fellow, and swore to the king that Tom
had done it out of mere mischief; so he was taken up, tried, and
sentenced to be beheaded. Tom hearing this dreadful sentence, and
seeing a miller stand by with his mouth wide open, he took a good
spring, and jumped down the miller's throat, unperceived by all, even
by the miller himself.

Tom being lost, the court broke up, and away went the miller to his
mill. But Tom did not leave him long at rest: he began to roll and
tumble about, so that the miller thought himself bewitched, and sent
for a doctor. When the doctor came, Tom began to dance and sing; the
doctor was as much frightened as the miller, and sent in great haste
for five more doctors and twenty learned men. While all these were
debating upon the affair, the miller (for they were very tedious)
happened to yawn, and Tom, taking the opportunity, made another jump,
and alighted on his feet in the middle of the table. The miller,
provoked to be thus tormented by such a little creature, fell into a
great passion, caught hold of Tom, and threw him out of the window
into the river. A large salmon swimming by snapped him up in a minute.
The salmon was soon caught and sold in the market to a steward of a
lord. The lord, thinking it an uncommon fine fish, made a present of
it to the king, who ordered it to be dressed immediately. When the
cook cut open the salmon, he found poor Tom, and ran with him directly
to the king; but the king, being busy with state affairs, desired that
he might be brought another day. The cook resolving to keep him safely
this time, as he had so lately given him the slip, clapped him into a
mouse-trap, and left him to amuse himself by peeping through the wires
for a whole week; when the king sent for him, he forgave him for
throwing down the furmenty, ordered him new clothes, and knighted
him:--

    "His shirt was made of butterflies' wings,
    His boots were made of chicken skins;
    His coat and breeches were made with pride:
    A tailor's needle hung by his side;
    A mouse for a horse he used to ride."

Thus dressed and mounted, he rode a-hunting with the king and
nobility, who all laughed heartily at Tom and his fine prancing steed.
As they rode by a farmhouse one day, a cat jumped from behind the
door, seized the mouse and little Tom, and began to devour the mouse;
however, Tom boldly drew his sword and attacked the cat, who then let
him fall. The king and his nobles, seeing Tom falling, went to his
assistance, and one of the lords caught him in his hat; but poor Tom
was sadly scratched, and his clothes were torn by the claws of the
cat. In this condition he was carried home, when a bed of down was
made for him in a little ivory cabinet. The queen of the fairies came
and took him again to Fairyland, where she kept him for some years;
and then, dressing him in bright green, sent him flying once more
through the air to the earth, in the days of King Thunstone. The
people flocked far and near to look at him; and the king, before whom
he was carried, asked him who he was, whence he came, and where he
lived? Tom answered:--

    "My name Is Tom Thumb,
    From the Fairies I come;
    When King Arthur shone,
    This court was my home.
    In me he delighted,
    By him I was knighted;
    Did you never hear of
    Sir Thomas Thumb?"

The king was so charmed with this address, that he ordered a little
chair to be made, in order that Tom might sit on his table, and also a
palace of gold a span high, with a door an inch wide, for little Tom
to live in. He also gave him a coach drawn by six small mice, This
made the queen angry, because she had not a new coach too: therefore,
resolving to ruin Tom, she complained to the king that he had behaved
very insolently to her. The king sent for him in a rage. Tom, to
escape his fury, crept into an empty snail-shell, and there lay till
he was almost starved; when, peeping out of the hole, he saw a fine
butterfly settle on the ground: he now ventured out, and getting
astride, the butterfly took wing, and mounted into the air with
little Tom on his back. Away he flew from field to field, from tree to
tree, till at last he flew to the king's court. The king, queen, and
nobles, all strove to catch the butterfly, but could not. At length
poor Tom, having neither bridle nor saddle, slipped from his seat, and
fell into a watering-pot, where he was found almost drowned. The queen
vowed he should be guillotined; but while the guillotine was getting
ready, he was secured once more in a mouse-trap; when the cat, seeing
something stir, and supposing it to be a mouse, patted the trap about
till she broke it, and set Tom at liberty. Soon afterwards a spider,
taking him for a fly, made at him. Tom drew his sword and fought
valiantly, but the spider's poisonous breath overcame him:--

    "He fell dead on the ground where late he had stood,
    And the spider suck'd up the last drop of his blood."

King Thunstone and his whole court went into mourning for little Tom
Thumb. They buried him under a rosebush, and raised a nice white
marble monument over his grave, with the following epitaph:--

    "Here lies Tom Thumb, King Arthur's knight,
    Who died by a spider's cruel bite.
    He was well known in Arthur's court,
    Where he afforded gallant sport;
    He rode at tilt and tournament,
    And on a mouse a-hunting went;
    Alive he fill'd the court with mirth,
    His death to sorrow soon gave birth.
    Wipe, wipe your eyes, and shake your head,
    And cry, 'Alas! Tom Thumb is dead.'"




RUMPELSTILZCHEN.


There was once a miller who was very poor, but he had a beautiful
daughter. Now, it happened that he came to speak to the king, and, to
give himself importance, he said to him, "I have a daughter who can
spin straw into gold."

The king said to the miller, "That is a talent that pleases me well;
if she be as skilful as you say, bring her to-morrow to the palace,
and I will put her to the proof."

When the maiden was brought to him, he led her to a room full of
straw, gave her a wheel and spindle, and said, "Now set to work, and
if by the morrow this straw be not spun into gold, you shall die." He
locked the door, and left the maiden alone.

The poor girl sat down disconsolate, and could not for her life think
what she was to do; for she knew not--how could she?--the way to spin
straw into gold; and her distress increased so much that at last she
began to weep. All at once the door opened, and a little man entered,
and said, "Good evening, my pretty miller's daughter why are you
weeping so bitterly?"

"Ah!" answered the maiden, "I must spin straw into gold, and know not
how to do it."

The little man said, "What will you give me if I do it for you?"

"My neckerchief," said the maiden.

He took the kerchief, sat down before the wheel, and grind, grind,
grind--three times did he grind--and the spindle was full: then he put
another thread on, and grind, grind, grind, the second was full; so he
spun on till morning; when all the straw was spun, and all the
spindles were full of gold.

The king came at sunrise, and was greatly astonished and overjoyed at
the sight; but it only made his heart the more greedy of gold. He put
the miller's daughter into another much larger room, full of straw,
and ordered her to spin it all in one night, if life were dear to her.
The poor helpless maiden began to weep, when once more the door flew
open, the little man appeared, and said, "What will you give me if I
spin this straw into gold?"

"My ring from my finger," answered the maiden.

The little man took the ring, began to turn the wheel, and, by the
morning, all the straw was spun into shining gold.

The king was highly delighted when he saw it, but was not yet
satisfied with the quantity of gold; so he put the damsel into a still
larger room, full of straw, and said, "Spin this during the night; and
if you do it, you shall be my wife." "For," he thought, "if she's only
a miller's daughter I shall never find a richer wife in the whole
world."

As soon as the damsel was alone, the little man came the third time,
and said, "What will you give me if I again spin all this straw for
you?"

"I have nothing more to give you," answered the girl.

"Then promise, if you become queen, to give me your first child."

"Who knows how that may be, or how things may turn out between now and
then?" thought the girl, but in her perplexity she could not help
herself: so she promised the little man what he desired, and he spun
all the straw into gold.

When the king came in the morning, and saw that his orders had been
obeyed, he married the maiden, and the beautiful miller's daughter
became a queen. After a year had passed she brought a lovely baby into
the world, but quite forgot the little man, till he walked suddenly
into her chamber, and said, "Give me what you promised me." The queen
was frightened, and offered the dwarf all the riches of the kingdom if
he would only leave her her child; but he answered, "No; something
living is dearer to me than all the treasures of the world."

Then the queen began to grieve and to weep so bitterly, that the
little man took pity upon her and said, "I will give you three days;
if in that time you can find out my name, you shall keep the child."

All night long the queen thought over every name she had ever heard,
and sent a messenger through the kingdom, to inquire what names were
usually given to people in that country. When, next day, the little
man came again, she began with Caspar, Melchoir, Balthazar, and
repeated, each after each, all the names she knew or had heard of; but
at each one the little man said, "That is not my name."

The second day she again sent round about in all directions, to ask
how the people were called, and repeated to the little man the
strangest names she could hear of or imagine: to each he answered
always, "That is not my name."

The third day the messenger returned and said, "I have not been able
to find a single new name; but as I came over a high mountain by a
wood, where the fox and the hare bid each other good-night, I saw a
little house, and before the house was burning a little fire, and
round the fire danced a very funny little man, who hopped upon one
leg, and cried out:--

    "To-day I brew, to-morrow I bake,
    Next day the queen's child I shall take;
    How glad I am that nobody knows
    My name is Rumpelstilzchen!"

You may guess how joyful the queen was at hearing this; and when, soon
after, the little man entered and said, "Queen, what is my name?" she
asked him mischievously, "Is your name Kunz?"

"No."

"Is your name Carl?"

"No."

"Are you not sometimes called Rumpelstilzchen?"

"A witch has told you that--a witch has told you!" shrieked the poor
little man, and stamped so furiously with his right foot that it sunk
into the earth up to the hip; then he seized his left foot with both
hands with such violence, that he tore himself right in two.




FORTUNATUS.


In the city of Famagosta, in the island of Cyprus, there lived a very
rich gentleman. His name was Theodorus: he married a lady who was the
greatest beauty in Cyprus, and she was as rich as himself; she was
called Graciana. They both had every pleasure that wealth could buy,
and lived in the first style. Besides all this, the lady Graciana
brought her husband a fine little son, who was named Fortunatus; so
one would think nothing could have kept Theodorus from being the most
happy person in the world. But this was not long the case; for when he
had enjoyed all these pleasures for some time, he grew tired of them,
and began to keep company with young noblemen of the court, with whom
he sat up all night drinking and playing cards, so that in a few years
he spent all his fortune. He was now very sorry for what he had done,
but it was too late; and there was nothing he could do, but to work at
some trade to support his wife and child. For all this the lady
Graciana never found fault with him, but still loved her husband the
same as before; saying, "Dear Theodorus, to be sure I do not know how
to work at any trade; but if I can not help you in earning money, I
will help you to save it." So Theodorus set to work; and though the
lady Graciana had always been used only to ring her bell for
everything that she wanted, she now scoured the kettles and washed the
clothes with her own hands.

They went on in this manner till Fortunatus was sixteen years of age.
When that time came, one day, as they were all sitting at dinner,
Theodorus fixed his eyes on his son, and sighed deeply.

"What is the matter with you, father?" said Fortunatus.

"Ah! my child," said Theodorus, "I have reason enough to be sorry,
when I think of the noble fortune which I have spent, and that my
folly will force you to labour for your living."

"Father," replied Fortunatus, "do not grieve about it. I have often
thought that it was time I should do something for myself; and though
I have not been brought up to any trade, yet I hope I can contrive to
support myself somehow."

When Fortunatus had done his dinner, he took his hat and walked to the
sea-side, thinking of what he could do, so as to be no longer a burden
to his parents. Just as he reached the sea-shore, the Earl of
Flanders, who had been to Jerusalem, was embarking on board his ship
with all his servants, to set sail for Flanders. Fortunatus now
thought he would offer himself to be the Earl's page. When the Earl
saw that he was a smart-looking lad, and heard the quick replies which
he made to his questions, he took him into his service; so at once
they all went on board. On their way the ship stopped a short time at
the port of Venice, where Fortunatus saw many strange things, which
made him wish still more to travel, and taught him much that he did
not know before.

Soon after this they came to Flanders; and they had not been long on
shore, before the Earl, his master, was married to the daughter of the
Duke of Cleves. The wedding was kept with all sorts of public
feasting, and games on horseback, called tilts, which lasted many
days; and, among the rest, the Earl's lady gave two jewels as prizes
to be played for, each of them the value of a hundred crowns. One of
them was won by Fortunatus, and the other by Timothy, a servant of the
Duke of Burgundy; who afterwards ran another tilt with Fortunatus, so
that the winner was to have both the jewels. So they tilted, and, at
the fourth course, Fortunatus hoisted Timothy a full spear's length
from his horse, and thus won both the jewels, which pleased the Earl
and Countess so much that they praised Fortunatus, and thought better
of him than ever. At this time, also, Fortunatus had many rich
presents given him by the lords and ladies of the court. But the high
favour shown him made his fellow-servants jealous, and one, named
Robert, who had always pretended a great friendship for Fortunatus,
made him believe that for all his seeming kindness, the Earl, in
secret, envied him his great skill in tilting. Robert said, too, that
he had heard the Earl give private orders to one of his servants to
find some way of killing him next day, while they should all be out
hunting.

Fortunatus thanked the wicked Robert for what he thought a great
kindness; and the next day, at daybreak, he took the swiftest horse in
the Earl's stables, and left the country. When the Earl heard that
Fortunatus had gone away in a hurry, he was much surprised, and asked
all his servants what they knew about the matter, but they all denied
knowing anything of it, or why he had left them. The Earl then said,
"Fortunatus was a lad for whom I had a great esteem; I am sure some of
you must have given him an affront; if I discover it, I shall not fail
to punish the guilty person." In the meantime, Fortunatus, when he
found himself out of the Earl's country, stopped at an inn to refresh
himself, and began to reckon how much he had about him. He took out
all his fine clothes and jewels, and could not help putting them on.
He then looked at himself in the glass, and thought that, to be sure,
he was quite a fine smart fellow. Next he took out his purse, and
counted the money that had been given him by the lords and ladies of
the Earl's court. He found that in all he had five hundred crowns; so
he bought a horse, and took care to send back the one that he had
taken from the Earl's stable.

He then set off for Calais, crossed the Channel, landed safely at
Dover, and went on to London, where he soon made his way into genteel
company, and had once the honour to dance with the daughter of a Duke
at the Lord Mayor's ball. This sort of life, as anybody may well
think, soon made away with his little stock of money. When Fortunatus
found that he had not a penny left, he began to think of going back
again to France, and soon after went on board a ship bound to Picardy.
He landed in that country, but finding no employment he set off for
Brittany, when he lost his way in crossing a wood, and was forced to
stay in it all night. The next morning he was little better off, for
he could find no path. So he walked about from one part of the wood to
another, till at last, on the evening of the second day, he saw a
spring, at which he drank very heartily; but still he had nothing to
eat, and was ready to die with hunger. When night came on, he heard
the growling of wild beasts, so he climbed up a high tree for safety,
and he had hardly seated himself in it, before a lion walked fiercely
up to the spring to drink. This made him very much afraid. When the
lion had gone away, a bear came to drink also; and, as the moon shone
very bright, the beast looked up, and saw Fortunatus, and straightway
began to climb up the tree to get at him.

Fortunatus drew his sword, and sat quiet till the bear was come within
arm's length; and then he ran him through the body. This drove the
bear so very savage, that he made a great spring to get at him; but
the bough broke, and down he fell, and lay sprawling and howling on
the ground. Fortunatus now looked around on all sides; and as he saw
no more wild beasts near, he thought this would be a good time to get
rid of the bear at once; so down he came, and killed him at a single
blow. Being almost starved for want of food, the poor youth stooped
down, and was going to suck the blood of the bear; but looking round
once more, to see if any wild beasts were coming, he on a sudden
beheld a beautiful lady standing by his side, with a bandage over her
eyes, leaning upon a wheel, and looking as if she were going to speak,
which she soon did, in these words: "Know, young man, that my name is
Fortune; I have the power to bestow wisdom, strength, riches, health,
beauty, and long life; one of these I am willing to grant you--choose
for yourself which it shall be."

Fortunatus was not a moment before he answered: "Good lady, I wish to
have riches in such plenty that I may never again know what it is to
be so hungry as I now find myself." The lady then gave him a purse,
and told him that in all the countries where he might happen to be, he
need only put his hand into the purse as often as he pleased, and he
would be sure to find in it ten pieces of gold; that the purse should
never fail of yielding the same sum as long as it was kept by him and
his children; but that when he and his children should be dead, then
the purse would lose its power.

Fortunatus now did not know what to do with himself for joy, and began
to thank the lady very much; but she told him that he had better think
of making his way out of the wood. She then directed him which path to
take, and bade him farewell. He walked by the light of the moon, as
fast as his weakness and fatigue would let him, till he came near an
inn. But before he went into it, he thought it would be best to see
whether the Lady Fortune had been as good as her word; so he put his
hand into his purse, and to his great joy he counted ten pieces of
gold. Having nothing to fear, Fortunatus walked boldly up to the inn,
and called for the best supper they could get ready in a minute;
"For," said he, "I must wait till to-morrow before I am very nice. I
am so hungry now, that almost anything will do." Fortunatus very soon
ate quite enough, and then called for every sort of wine in the house,
and drank his fill. After supper, he began to think what sort of life
he should lead; "For," said he to himself, "I shall now have money
enough for everything I can desire." He slept that night in the very
best bed in the house, and the next day he ordered the finest victuals
of all kinds. When he rang his bell, all the waiters tried who should
run the fastest, to ask him what he pleased to want; and the landlord
himself, hearing what a noble guest was come to his house, took care
to be standing at the door to bow to him when he should be passing
out.

Fortunatus asked the landlord whether any fine horses could be got
near at hand; also, if he knew of some smart-looking, clever
men-servants who wanted places. By chance the landlord was able to
provide him with both. As he had now got everything he wanted, he set
out on the finest horse that was ever seen, with two servants, for the
nearest town. There he bought some grand suits of clothes, put his two
servants into liveries laced with gold, and they went on to Paris.
Here he took the best house that was to be had, and lived in great
pomp. He invited the nobility, and gave grand balls to all the most
beautiful ladies of the court. He went to all public places of
amusement, and the first lords in the country invited him to their
houses. He had lived in this manner for about a year, when he began to
think of going to Famagosta to visit his parents, whom he had left
very poor. "But," thought Fortunatus, "as I am young and have not seen
much of the world, I should like to meet with some person of more
knowledge than I have, who would make my journey both useful and
pleasing to me." Soon after this he met with an old gentleman, called
Loch-Fitty, who was a native of Scotland, and had left a wife and ten
children a great many years ago, in hopes to better his fortune; but
now, owing to many accidents, was poorer than ever, and had not money
enough to take him back to his family.

When Loch-Fitty found how much Fortunatus wished to obtain knowledge,
he told him many of the strange adventures he had met with, and gave
him an account of all the countries he had been in, as well as of the
customs, dress, and manners of the people. Fortunatus thought to
himself, "This is the very man I stand in need of;" so at once he made
him a good offer, which the old gentleman agreed to, but made the
bargain that he might first go and visit his family. Fortunatus told
him that he should. "And," said he, "as I am a little tired of being
always in the midst of such noisy pleasures as we find at Paris, I
will, with your leave, go with you to Scotland, and see your wife and
children." They get out the very next day, and came safe to the house
of Loch-Fitty; and in all the journey, Fortunatus did not once wish to
change his kind companion for all the pleasures and grandeur he had
left behind. Loch-Fitty kissed his wife and children, five of whom
were daughters, and the most beautiful creatures that were ever
beheld. When they were seated, his wife said to him, "Ah! dear Lord
Loch-Fitty, how happy I am to see you once again! Now, I hope we shall
enjoy each other's company for the rest of our lives. What though we
are poor! We will be content if you will but promise not to think of
leaving us again to get riches, only because we have a noble title."

Fortunatus heard this with great surprise. "What!" said he, "are you a
lord? Then you shall be a rich lord too. And that you may not think I
lay you under any burden in the fortune I shall give you, I will put
it in your power to make me your debtor instead. Give me your youngest
daughter, Cassandra, for a wife, and accompany us as far as Famagosta,
and take all your family with you, that you may have pleasant company
on your way back, when you have rested in that place from your
fatigue."

Lord Loch-Fitty shed some tears of joy to think he should at last see
his family again raised to all the honours which it had once enjoyed.
He gladly agreed to the marriage of Fortunatus with his daughter
Cassandra, and then told him the reasons that had forced him to drop
his title and live poor at Paris. When Lord Loch-Fitty had ended his
story, they agreed that the very next morning the Lady Cassandra
should be asked to accept the hand of Fortunatus; and that, if she
should consent, they would set sail in a few days for Famagosta. The
next morning the offer was made to her, as had been agreed on, and
Fortunatus had the pleasure of hearing from the lips of the beautiful
Cassandra, that the very first time she cast her eyes on him she
thought him the most handsome gentleman in the world.

Everything was soon ready for them to set out on the journey.
Fortunatus, Lord Loch-Fitty, his lady, and their ten children, then
set sail in a large ship: they had a good voyage, and landed safe at
the port of Famagosta. There, however, Fortunatus found, with great
grief and self-reproach, that his father and mother were both dead.
However, as he was an easy-tempered gentleman, and had his betrothed
Cassandra and her whole family to reconcile him to his grief, it did
not last very long; the wedding took place almost immediately; so they
lived all together in Famagosta, and in very great style. By the end
of the first year, the Lady Cassandra had a little son, who was
christened Ampedo; and the next year another, who was christened
Andolucia. For twelve years Fortunatus lived a very happy life with
his wife and children, and his wife's kindred; and as each of her
sisters had a fortune given her from the purse of Fortunatus, they
soon married very well. But by this time he began to long to travel
again; and he thought, as he was now so much older and wiser than when
he was at Paris, he might go by himself, for Lord Loch-Fitty was at
this time too old to bear fatigue. After he had, with great trouble,
got the consent of the Lady Cassandra, and made her a promise to stay
away only two years, he made all things ready for his journey; and
taking his lady into one of his private rooms, he showed her three
chests of gold. He told her to keep one of these for herself, and take
charge of the other two for their sons, in case any evil should happen
to him. He then led her back to the room where the whole family were
sitting, embraced them all tenderly one by one, and set sail with a
fair wind for Alexandria.

When Fortunatus came to this place, he was told it was the custom to
make a handsome present to the sultan; so he sent him a piece of plate
that cost five thousand pounds. The sultan was so much pleased with
this, that he ordered a hundred casks of spices to be given to
Fortunatus in return. Fortunatus sent these straight to the Lady
Cassandra, with the most tender letters, by the same ship that brought
him, which was then going back to Famagosta. Having stated that he
wished to travel through his country by land, he obtained from the
sultan such passports and letters as he might stand in need of, to the
other princes in those parts. He then bought a camel, hired proper
servants, and set off on his travels. He went through Turkey, Persia,
and from thence to Carthage; he next went into the country of Prester
John, who rides upon a white elephant, and has kings to wait on him.
Fortunatus made him some rich presents, and went on to Calcutta; and,
in coming back, he took Jerusalem in the way, and so came again to
Alexandria, where he had the good fortune to find the same ship that
had brought him, and to learn from the captain that his wife and
family were all in perfect health. The first thing he did was to pay a
visit to his old friend the sultan, to whom he again made a handsome
present, and was invited to dine at his palace. After dinner, the
sultan said: "It must be vastly amusing, Fortunatus, to hear an
account of all the places you have seen; pray favour me with a history
of your travels." Fortunatus did as he was desired, and pleased the
sultan very much by telling him the many odd adventures he had met
with; and, above all, the manner of his first becoming known to the
Lord Loch-Fitty, and the desire of that lord to maintain the honours
of his family. When he had ended, the sultan said he was greatly
pleased with what he had heard, but that he possessed a more curious
thing than any Fortunatus had told him of. He then led him into a room
almost filled with jewels, opened a large closet, and took out a cap,
which he said was of greater value than all the rest. Fortunatus
thought the sultan was joking, and told him he had seen many a better
cap than that. "Ah!" said the sultan, "that is because you do not know
its value. Whoever puts this cap on his head, and wishes to be in any
part of the world, will find himself there in a moment."

"Indeed!" said Fortunatus; "and pray, is the man living who made it?"

"I know nothing about that," said the sultan.

"One would hardly believe it," said Fortunatus. "Pray, sir, is it very
heavy?"

"Not at all," replied the sultan; "you may feel it."

Fortunatus took up the cap, put it on his head, and could not help
wishing himself on board the ship that was going back to Famagosta. In
less than a moment he was carried on board of her, just as she was
ready to sail; and there being a brisk gale, they were out of sight in
half an hour, before the sultan had even time to repent of his folly
for letting Fortunatus try the cap on his head. The ship came safe to
Famagosta, after a happy passage, and Fortunatus found his wife and
children well; but Lord Loch-Fitty and his lady had died of old age,
and were buried in the same grave.

Fortunatus now began to take great pleasure in teaching his two boys
all sorts of useful learning, and also such manly sports as wrestling
and tilting. Now and then he thought about the curious cap which had
brought him home, and then would wish he could just take a peep at
what was passing in other countries; which wish was always fulfilled:
but he never stayed there more than an hour or two, so that the Lady
Cassandra did not miss him, and was no longer made uneasy by his love
of travelling.

At last, Fortunatus began to grow old, and the Lady Cassandra fell
sick and died. The loss of her caused him so much grief, that soon
after he fell sick too. As he thought he had not long to live, he
called his two sons to his bedside, and told them the secrets of the
purse and the cap, which he begged they would not, on any account,
make known to others. "Follow my example," said he: "I have had the
purse these forty years, and no living person knew from what source I
obtained my riches." He then told them to make use of the purse
between them, and to live together in friendship; and embracing them,
died soon after. Fortunatus was buried with great pomp by the side of
Lady Cassandra, in his own chapel, and was for a long time mourned by
the people of Famagosta.




THE BREMEN TOWN MUSICIANS.


There was a man who owned a donkey, which had carried his sacks to the
mill industriously for many years, but whose strength had come to an
end, so that the poor beast grew more and more unfit for work. The
master determined to stop his food, but the donkey, discovering that
there was no good intended to him, ran away and took the road to
Bremen: "There," thought he, "I can turn Town Musician."

When he had gone a little way, he found a hound lying on the road and
panting, like one who was tired with running. "Hollo! what are you
panting so for, worthy Seize 'em?" asked the donkey.

"Oh!" said the dog, "just because I am old, and get weaker every day,
and cannot go out hunting, my master wanted to kill me, so I have
taken leave of him; but how shall I gain my living now?"

"I'll tell you what," said the donkey, "I am going to Bremen to be
Town Musician; come with me and take to music too. I will play the
lute, and you shall beat the drum."

The dog liked the idea, and they travelled on. It was not long before
they saw a cat sitting by the road, making a face like three rainy
days.

"Now then, what has gone wrong with you old Whiskers?" said the
donkey.

"Who can be merry when his neck is in danger?" answered the cat.
"Because I am advanced in years, and my teeth are blunt, and I like
sitting before the fire and purring better than chasing the mice
about, my mistress wanted to drown me. I have managed to escape, but
good advice is scarce; tell me where I shall go to?"

"Come with us two to Bremen; you understand serenading; you also can
become a Town Musician."

The cat thought it a capital idea, and went with them. Soon after the
three runaways came to a farmyard, and there sat a cock on the gate,
crowing with might and main.

"You crow loud enough to deafen one," said the donkey; "what is the
matter with you?"

"I prophesied fair weather," said the cock, "because it is our good
mistress's washing-day, and she wants to dry the clothes; but because
to-morrow is Sunday, and company is coming, the mistress has no pity
on me, and has told the cook to put me into the soup to-morrow, and I
must have my head cut off to-night: so now I am crowing with all my
might as long as I can."

"O you old Redhead," said the donkey, "you had better come with us; we
are going to Bremen, where you will certainly find something better
than having your head cut off; you have a good voice, and if we all
make music together, it will be something striking."

The cock liked the proposal, and they went on, all four together.

But they could not reach the city of Bremen in one day, and they came
in the evening to a wood, where they agreed to spend the night. The
donkey and the dog laid themselves down under a great tree, but the
cat and the cock went higher--the cock flying up to the topmost
branch, where he was safest. Before he went to sleep he looked round
towards all the four points of the compass, and he thought he saw a
spark shining in the distance. He called to his companions that there
must be a house not far off; for he could see a light. The donkey
said: "Then we must rise and go to it, for the lodgings here are very
bad;" and the dog said, "Yes; a few bones with a little flesh on them
would do me good." So they took the road in the direction where the
light was, and soon saw it shine brighter; and it got larger and
larger till they came to a brilliantly-illumined robber's house. The
donkey, being the biggest, got up at the window and looked in.

"What do you see, Greybeard?" said the cock.

"What do I see?" answered the donkey: "a table covered with beautiful
food and drink, and robbers are sitting round it and enjoying
themselves."

"That would do nicely for us," said the cock.

"Yes, indeed, if we were only there," replied the donkey.

The animals then consulted together how they should manage to drive
out the robbers, till at last they settled on a plan. Tie donkey was
to place himself with his forefeet on the window-sill, the dog to
climb on the donkey's back, and the cat on the dog's, and, at last,
the cock was to fly up and perch himself on the cat's head. When that
was done, at a signal they began their music all together: the donkey
brayed, the dog barked, the cat mewed, and the cock crowed; then, with
one great smash, they dashed through the window into the room, so that
the glass clattered down. The robbers jumped up at this dreadful
noise, thinking that nothing less than a ghost was coming in, and ran
away into the wood in a great fright. The four companions then sat
down at the table, quite content with what was left there, and ate as
if they were expecting to fast for a month to come.

When the four musicians had finished, they put out the light, and each
one looked out for a suitable and comfortable sleeping-place. The
donkey lay down on the dunghill, the dog behind the door, the cat on
the hearth near the warm ashes, and the cock set himself on the
hen-roost; and, as they were all tired with their long journey, they
soon went to sleep. Soon after midnight, as the robbers in the
distance could see that no more lights were burning in the house, and
as all seemed quiet, the captain said, "We ought not to have let
ourselves be scared so easily," and sent one of them to examine the
house. The messenger found everything quiet, went into the kitchen to
light a candle, and, thinking the cat's shining fiery eyes were live
coals, he held a match to them to light it. But the cat did not
understand the joke, flew in his face, spat at him, and scratched. He
was dreadfully frightened, ran away, and was going out of the back
door; when the dog, who was lying there, jumped up and bit him in the
leg. As he ran through the yard, past the dunghill, the donkey gave
him a good kick with his hind-foot; and the cock being awakened, and
made quite lively by the noise, called out from the hen-roost
"Cock-a-doodle-doo!"

The robber ran as hard as he could, back to the captain, and said:
"Oh, dear! in the house sits a horrid old witch, who blew at me, and
scratched my face with her long fingers; and by the door stands a man
with a knife, who stabbed me in the leg; and in the yard lies a black
monster, who hit me with a club; and up on the roof there sits the
judge, who called out, 'Bring the rascal up here'--so I made the best
of my way off."

From that time the robbers never trusted themselves again in the
house; but the four musicians liked it so well that they could not
make up their minds to leave it, and spent there the remainder of
their days, as the last person who told the story is ready to avouch
for a fact.




RIQUET WITH THE TUFT


Once upon a time a queen had a little son, who was so ugly and
ill-made, that for a long time the poor little baby was thought hardly
human. However, a good fairy, who presided at his birth, assured his
mother that, though ugly, he would have so much sense and wit that he
would never be disagreeable; moreover, she bestowed on him the power
of communicating these gifts to the person he should love best in the
world. At this the queen was a little comforted, and became still more
so, when, as soon as he could speak, the infant began to say such
pretty and clever things that everybody was charmed with him. (I
forgot to mention that his name was Riquet with the Tuft, because he
was born with a curious tuft of hair on the top of his head.)

Seven or eight years after this, the queen of a neighbouring country
had two little daughters, twins, at whose birth the same fairy
presided. The elder twin was more beautiful than the day--the younger
so extremely ugly that the mother's extravagant joy in the first was
all turned to grief about the second. So, in order to calm her
feelings, the fairy told her that the one daughter should be as stupid
as she was pretty, while the other would grow up so clever and
charming that nobody would miss her want of beauty.

"Heaven grant it!" sighed the queen; "but are there no means of giving
a little sense to the one who is so beautiful?"

"I can do nothing for her, madam," returned the fairy--"nothing as
regards her own fortunes; but I grant her the power of making the
person who best pleases her as handsome as herself."

Accordingly, as the young princesses grew up, their perfections grew
with them; and nothing was spoken of but the beauty of the elder and
the wit of the younger. True, their faults increased equally: the one
became uglier, and the other more stupid, day by day. Unlucky fair
one! she never had a word to say for herself, or else it was the
silliest word imaginable, and she was so awkward that she could not
place four teacups in a row without breaking at least one of them, nor
drink a glass of water without spilling half of it over her clothes.
Beauty is a great charm; yet, whenever the sisters went out together,
those who were attracted by the elder's lovely face, in less than half
an hour were sure to be seen at the side of the younger, laughing at
her witty and pleasant sayings, and altogether deserting the poor
beauty, who had just sense enough to find it out, and to feel that she
would have given all her good looks for one half of her sister's
talents.

One day, when she had hid herself in a wood, and was crying over her
hard fate, she saw coming towards her a little man, very ugly, but
magnificently dressed. Who should this be but Prince Riquet with the
Tuft? He had seen her portrait, had fallen desperately in love with
her, and secretly quitted his father's kingdom that he might have the
pleasure of meeting her. Delighted to find her alone, he came forward
with all the respect and politeness imaginable. But he could not help
noticing how very melancholy she was, and that all the elegant
compliments he made her did not seem to affect her in the least.

"I cannot comprehend, madam," said he, "how so charming and lovely a
lady can be so very sad. Never did I see anyone who could at all
compare with you."

"That's all you know," said the princess, and stopped.

"Beauty," continued the prince, sighing, "is so great an advantage
that, if one possessed it, one would never trouble oneself about
anything else.

"I wish I were as ugly as you and had some sense, rather than be as
handsome as I am, and such a fool."

"Madam," said Riquet politely, though her speech was not exactly
civil, "nothing shows intellect so much as the modesty of believing
one does not possess it."

"I don't know that; but I know I am a great fool, and it vexes me so,
that I wish I was dead," cried the princess bitterly.

"If that is all, madam, I can easily put an end to your grief, for I
have the power of making the person I love best as clever as I
please. I will do it, provided you consent to marry me."

The princess stood dumb with astonishment. She--to marry that little
frightful creature--scarcely a man at all!

"I see," said Riquet, "that my proposal offends and grieves you. Well,
I will give you a year to consider it."

Now the young lady was so stupid that she thought a year's end was a
long way off--so long that it seemed as if it might not come at all,
or something might happen between whiles. And she had such a longing
to be clever and admired that she thought at all risks she would
accept the chance of becoming so. Accordingly, she promised Riquet to
marry him that day twelvemonth.

No sooner had she said it than she felt herself quite another being.
She found she could at once say anything she chose, and say it in the
most graceful and brilliant way. She began a lively conversation with
Prince Riquet, and chattered so fast and so wittily, that he began to
be afraid he had given her so much cleverness as to leave himself
none.

When she returned to the palace, all the court were astonished at the
change. She, who had annoyed everybody by the impertinent, tasteless,
or downright foolish things she uttered, now charmed everybody by her
wit, her pleasantness, and her exceeding good sense. The king himself
began to come to her apartment, and ask her advice in state affairs.
Her mother, and indeed the whole kingdom, were delighted; the only
person to be pitied was the poor younger sister, of whom nobody now
took the least notice.

Meantime, princes came in throngs to ask in marriage this wonderful
princess, who was as clever as she was beautiful; but she found none
to suit her, probably because the more sense a lady has, the more
difficult she is to please. As for her promise to Riquet with the
Tuft, being given in the days when she was so dull and stupid, it now
never once came into her head; until one day, being quite perplexed by
her numerous suitors, she went to take a solitary walk and think the
matter over, when by chance she came into the same wood where she had
met the prince. There, all of a sudden, she thought she heard a queer
running about and chattering underground. "Fetch me that spit," cried
one; "Put some more wood on that fire," said another; and by and by
the earth opened, showing a great kitchen filled with cooks, cooking a
splendid banquet. They were all working merrily at their several
duties, and singing together in the most lively chorus.

"What is all this about?" asked the amazed princess.

"If you please, madam," replied the head-cook, politely, "we are
cooking the wedding-dinner of Prince Riquet with the Tuft, who is to
be married to-morrow."

"To-morrow!" cried the princess, all at once recollecting her promise;
at which she was so frightened that she thought she should have
fallen to the earth. Greater still was her alarm when, at only a few
steps' distance, she beheld Riquet, dressed splendidly like a prince
and a bridegroom.

"You see me, princess, exact to my word; and I doubt not you are the
same, come to make me the happiest of mankind."

"Prince," said the lady, frankly, "I must confess that such was not my
intention, and I fear I shall never be able to do as you desire."

"You surprise me, madam."

"I can well believe it; and if I had to do with a brute, instead of a
gentleman of sense and feeling, I should be very uneasy," returned
she; "but since I speak with the cleverest man in the world, I am sure
he will hear reason, and will not bind me, now a sensible woman, to a
promise I made when I was only a fool."

"If I were a fool myself, madam, I might well complain of your broken
promise; and being, as you say, a man of sense, should I not complain
of what takes away all the happiness of my life? Tell me candidly, is
there anything in me, except my ugliness, which displeases you? Do you
object to my birth, my temper, my manners?"
