"No, truly," replied the princess; "I like everything in you,
except"--and she hesitated courteously--"except your appearance."

"Then, madam, I need not lose my happiness; for if I have the gift of
making clever whosoever I love best, you also are able to make the
person you prefer as handsome as ever you please. Could you love me
enough to do that?"

"I think I could," said the princess, and her heart being greatly
softened towards him, she wished that he might become the handsomest
prince in all the world. No sooner had she done so than Riquet with
the Tuft appeared in her eyes the most elegant young man she had ever
seen.

Ill-natured people have said that this was no fairy-gift, but that
love created the change. They declare that the princess, when she
thought over her lover's perseverance, patience, good-humour, and
discretion, and counted his numerous fine qualities of mind and
disposition, saw no longer the deformity of his body or the plainness
of his features; that his hump was merely an exaggerated stoop, and
his awkward movements became only an interesting eccentricity. Nay,
even his eyes, which squinted terribly, seemed always looking on all
sides for her, in token of his violent love, and his great red nose
gave him an air very martial and heroic.

However this may be, it is certain that the princess married him; that
either she retained her good sense, or he never felt the want of it;
and he never again became ugly--or, at least, not in his wife's eyes;
so they both lived very happy until they died.




HOUSE ISLAND.


There lived in Norway, not far from the city of Drontheim, a rich and
prosperous gentleman. He had an only daughter, called Aslog, the fame
of whose beauty spread far and wide. The greatest men of the country
sought her, but all were alike unsuccessful in their suit. Her father,
who thought his daughter delayed her choice only that she might choose
the better, forbore to interfere, and exulted in her prudence. But
when, at length, the richest and noblest had tried their fortune with
as little success as the rest, he grew angry, called his daughter, and
said to her:--

"Hitherto I have left you to your free choice, but since I see that
you reject all without any distinction, and the very best of your
suitors seem not good enough for you, I will keep measures no longer
with you. What! shall my family become extinct, and my inheritance
pass away into the hands of strangers? I will break your stubborn
spirit. I give you now till the festival of the great Winter-night; by
that time you must make your decision, or prepare to accept the
husband whom I myself shall select."

Now Aslog secretly loved a youth named Orm, handsome, noble and brave.
She loved him with her whole soul, and would sooner die than bestow
her hand on another. But Orm was poor, and poverty compelled him to
keep his love as secret as her own.

When Aslog saw the darkness of her father's countenance, and heard his
angry words, she turned pale as death, for she knew his temper, and
doubted not but that he would put his threats into execution. Without
uttering a word in reply, she retired to her chamber, and pondered
vainly how to escape the storm that hung over her. The great festival
approached nearer and nearer, and her anguish increased every day.

At last the lovers resolved on flight. Orm knew a secure place, where
they could hide until they found an opportunity of quitting the
country. So at night, when all were asleep, he led the trembling Aslog
over the snow and ice-fields away to the mountains. The moon and the
stars lighted them on their way. They had under their arms a few
articles of dress and some skins of animals, which were all they could
carry. They ascended the mountains the whole night long, till they
reached a lonely spot inclosed with lofty rocks. Here Orm conducted
the weary Aslog into a cave, the low and narrow entrance to which was
hardly perceptible, but it soon enlarged to a great hall, reaching
deep into the mountain. He kindled a fire, and they now, reposing on
their skins, sat in the deepest solitude far away from all the world.

Orm was the first who had discovered this cave, which is shown to this
very day. But as no one then knew anything of it, they were safe from
the pursuit of Aslog's father. They passed the whole winter in this
retirement, contented and even happy; for they knew they were married,
and belonged to one another, and no cruel father could separate them
more. Orm used to go a-hunting, and Aslog stayed at home in the cave,
minded the fire, and prepared the necessary food. Frequently did she
mount the points of the rocks, but her eyes, did they wander ever so
far, saw only glittering snow-fields.

The spring now came on--the woods were green--the meadows put on their
various colors, people began to wander out for summer pleasuring, and
Aslog could but rarely and with circumspection venture to leave the
cave. One evening Orm came in with the intelligence that he had
recognised her father's servants in the distance, and that he could
hardly have been unobserved by them. "They will surround this place,"
continued he, "and never rest till they have found us; we must quit
our retreat, then, without a moment's delay."

They accordingly descended on the other side of the mountain, and
reached the strand, where they fortunately found a boat. Orm pushed
off, and the boat drove into the open sea. They had escaped their
pursuers, but they were now exposed to dangers of another kind:
whither should they turn? They could not venture to land, for Aslog's
father was lord of the whole coast, and they would infallibly fall
into his hands. Nothing then remained for them but to commit their
bark to the wind and waves. They were driven along the entire night.
At break of day the coast had disappeared, and they saw nothing but
the sky, the sea, and the waves. They had not brought one morsel of
food with them, and thirst and hunger began now to torment them. Three
days did they toss about in this state of misery, and Aslog, faint and
exhausted, saw nothing but certain death before her.

At length, on the evening of the third day, they discovered an island
of tolerable magnitude, and surrounded by a number of smaller ones.
Orm immediately steered for it, but, just as he came near it, there
suddenly rose a violent wind, and the sea rolled every moment higher
and higher. He turned about with a view of approaching it on another
side, but with no better success; his vessel, as often as it neared
the island, was driven back as if by an invisible power. "God help
us!" he cried, and crossed himself, and looked on poor Aslog, who
seemed to be dying of weakness before his eyes. But scarcely had the
exclamation passed his lips when the storm ceased, the waves subsided,
and the vessel came to the shore without encountering any hindrance.
Orm jumped out on the beach; some mussels that he found on the strand
strengthened and revived the exhausted Aslog, so that she was soon
able to leave the boat.

The island was overgrown with low dwarf shrubs, and seemed to be
uninhabited; but when they had reached the middle of it, they
discovered a house, which appeared to be half under the surface of
the earth. In the hope of meeting with human help, the wanderers
approached it. They listened, but the most perfect silence reigned
there. Orm at length opened the door, and they both walked in: but
what was their surprise, to find everything regulated and arranged as
if for inhabitants, yet not a single living creature visible. The fire
was burning on the hearth, in the middle of the room, and a kettle
with fish hung on it, apparently only waiting for some one to take it
up and eat it. The beds were made, and ready to receive their wearied
tenants. Orm and Aslog stood for some time dubious, and looked on with
a certain degree of awe, but at last, overcome by hunger, they took up
the food and ate. When they had satisfied their appetites, and still
discovered no human being, they gave way to weariness, and laid
themselves in the beds, which looked so peaceful and inviting to their
wearied limbs.

They had expected to be awakened in the night by the owners of the
house on their return home, but their expectation was not fulfilled;
they slept undisturbed till the morning sun shone in upon them. No one
appeared on any of the following days, and it seemed as if some
invisible power had made ready the house for their reception. They
spent the whole summer in perfect happiness: they were, to be sure,
solitary, yet they did not miss mankind. The wild birds' eggs, and the
fish they caught, yielded them provisions in abundance.

When autumn came, Aslog brought forth a son. In the midst of their
joy at this, they were surprised by a wonderful apparition. The door
opened on a sudden, and an old woman stepped in. She wore a handsome
blue dress; there was something proud, but at the same time something
strange, in her appearance.

"Do not be afraid," said she, "at my unexpected appearance. I am the
owner of this house, and I thank you for the clean and neat state in
which you have kept it, and for the good order in which I find
everything with you. I would willingly have come sooner, but I had no
power to do so till this little heathen (pointing to the new-born
babe) was come to the light. Now I have free access. Only fetch no
priest from the mainland to christen it, or I must depart again. If
you will in this matter comply with my wishes, you may not only
continue to live here, but all the good that ever you can wish for I
will do you. Whatever you take in hand shall prosper; good luck shall
follow you wherever you go. But break this condition, and depend upon
it that misfortune after misfortune will come on you, and even on this
child will I avenge myself. If you want anything, or are in danger,
you have only to pronounce my name three times, and I will appear and
lend you assistance. I am of the race of the old giants, and my name
is Guru. But beware of uttering in my presence the name of Him whom no
giant may hear of, and never venture to make the sign of the cross, or
to cut it on beam or board in the house. You may dwell in this house
the whole year long, only be so good as to give it up to me on Yule
evening, when the sun is at the lowest, as then we celebrate our great
festival, and then only are we permitted to be merry. At least, if you
should not be willing to go out of the house, keep yourselves up in
the loft as quiet as possible the whole day long, and as you value
your lives do not look down into the room below until midnight is
past. After that you may take possession of everything again."

When the old woman had thus spoken she vanished, and Aslog and Orm
lived without any disturbance, contented and happy. Orm never made a
cast of his net without getting a plentiful draught; he never shot an
arrow from his bow that it was not sure to hit; in short, whatever
they took in hand, were it ever so trifling, evidently prospered.

When Christmas came, they cleaned up the house in the best manner, set
everything in order, kindled a fire on the hearth, and as the twilight
approached they went up to the loft, where they remained quite still
and quiet. At length it grew dark; they thought they heard a sound of
whizzing and snorting in the air, such as the swans used to make in
the winter time. There was a hole in the roof over the fireplace,
which might be opened and shut either to let in the light from above,
or to afford a free passage for the smoke. Orm lifted up the lid,
which was covered with a skin, and put out his head. But what a
wonderful sight then presented itself to his eyes! The little islands
around were all lit up with countless blue lights, which moved about
without ceasing, jumped up and down, then skipped to the shore,
assembled together, and came nearer and nearer to the large island
where Orm and Aslog lived. At last they reached it, and arranged
themselves in a circle around a large stone not far from the shore,
and which Orm well knew. But what was his surprise when he saw that
the stone had now completely assumed the form of a man, though a
monstrous and gigantic one! He could clearly perceive that the little
blue lights were borne by Dwarfs whose pale clay-coloured faces, with
their huge noses and red eyes, disfigured too by birds' bills and
owls' eyes, were supported by misshapen bodies, and they tottered and
wabbled about here and there, so that they seemed to be at the same
time merry and in pain. Suddenly, the circle opened; the little ones
retired on each side, and Guru--who was the woman Guru, whom Orm
recognised immediately, though she had risen in stature and size so as
to be almost as gigantic as the stone man--advanced towards it. She
threw both her arms round the image, which immediately seemed to
receive life and motion. Then the Dwarfs, with wonderful capers and
grimaces, began a song, or, to speak more properly, a howl, with which
the whole island resounded and almost trembled at the noise. Orm,
quite terrified, drew in his head, and he and Aslog remained in the
dark, so still that they hardly ventured to draw their breath.

The procession moved on towards the house, as might be clearly
perceived by the nearer approach of the shouting and crying. They were
now all come in, light and active; the Dwarfs were heard jumping about
on the benches, and heavy and loud sounded at intervals the steps of
the giants. Orm and his wife listened to the clattering of the plates,
and the shouts of joy with which they celebrated their banquet. When
it was over and midnight drew near, they began to dance to that
ravishing fairy-tune, which some have heard in the rocky glens, and
learned by listening to the underground musicians. As soon as Aslog
caught the sound of this air, she felt an irresistible longing to see
the dance. Nor was Orm able to keep her back. "Let me look," said she,
"or my heart will burst." She took her child and placed herself at the
extreme end of the loft, whence, without being observed, she could see
all that passed. Long did she gaze, without taking off her eyes for an
instant, on the dance--on the bold and wonderful springs of the little
creatures, who seemed to float in the air, and not so much as to touch
the ground, while the ravishing melody of the Elves filled her whole
soul. The child, meanwhile, which lay in her arms grew sleepy and drew
its breath heavily, and, without ever thinking on the promise she had
given the old woman, she made, as is usual, the sign of the cross over
the mouth of the child, and said, "Christ bless you, my babe!"

The instant she had spoken the word there was raised a horrible,
piercing cry. The Dwarfs tumbled head over heels out at the door with
terrible crushing and crowding, their lights went out, and in a few
minutes the whole house was clear of them and left desolate. Orm and
Aslog, frightened to death, hid themselves in the most retired nook
they could find. They did not venture to stir till daybreak, and not
till the sun shone through the hole in the roof down on the fireplace
did they feel courage enough to descend from the loft.

The table remained still covered as the underground people had left
it; all their vessels, which were of silver, and manufactured in the
most beautiful manner, lay upon it. In the middle of the room, there
stood upon the ground a huge copper kettle half full of sweet mead,
and by the side of it a drinking-horn of pure gold. In the corner
rested, against the wall, a stringed instrument, not unlike a
dulcimer, which, as people believe, the Giantesses used to play on.
They gazed on what was before them, full of admiration, but without
venturing to lay their hands on anything; how great and fearful was
their amazement, when, on turning about, they saw sitting at the table
an immense figure, which Orm instantly recognised as the Giant whom
Guru had animated by her embrace. He was now a cold and hard stone.
While they were standing gazing on it, Guru herself entered the room
in her giant form. She wept so bitterly, that her tears trickled down
on the ground. It was long ere her sobbing permitted her to utter a
single word; at last she spoke:--

"Great affliction have you brought on me, and henceforth I must weep
while I live; yet as I know that you have not done this with evil
intentions, I forgive you, though it were a trifle for me to crush the
whole house like an egg-shell over your heads."

"What have we done?" cried Orm and Aslog, penetrated with the deepest
sorrow.

"Alas!" answered she, "my husband, whom I love more than myself, there
he sits, petrified for ever; never again will he open his eyes! Three
hundred years lived I with my father on the island of Kunnan, happy in
the innocence of youth, as the fairest among the Giant-maidens. Mighty
heroes sued for my hand; the sea around that island is still filled
with the rocky fragments which they hurled against each other in their
combats. Andfind won the victory, and I plighted myself to him. But
ere I was married came the detestable Odin into the country, who
overcame my father, and drove us all from the island. My father and
sisters fled to the mountains, and since that time my eyes have beheld
them no more. Andfind and I saved ourselves on this island, where we
for a long time lived in peace and quiet, and thought it would never
be interrupted. But destiny which no one escapes, had determined it
otherwise. Oluf came from Britain. They called him the Holy, and
Andfind instantly found that his voyage would be inauspicious to the
Giants. When he heard how Oluf's ship rushed through the waves, he
went down to the strand and blew the sea against him with all his
strength. The waves swelled up like mountains. But Oluf was still
more mighty than he; his ship flew unchecked through the billows like
an arrow from a bow. He steered direct for our island. When the ship
was so near that Andfind thought he could reach it with his hands, he
grasped at the forepart with his right hand, and was about to drag it
down to the bottom, as he had often done with other ships. But Oluf,
the terrible Oluf, stepped forward, and crossing his hands over each
other, he cried with a loud voice, "Stand there as a stone till the
last day," and in the same instant my unhappy husband became a mass of
rock. The ship sailed on unimpeded, and ran direct against the
mountain, which it cut through, and separated from it the little
island which lies out yonder.

"Ever have I passed my life alone and forlorn. On Yule-eve alone can
petrified Giants receive back their life for the space of seven hours,
if one of their race embraces them, and is at the same time willing to
sacrifice a hundred years. I loved my husband too well not to bring
him back to life every time that I could do it, even at this price,
and I have not even counted how often I have done it, that I might not
know the hour when I myself should share his fate, and at the moment
when I threw my arms around him become stone like him. But, alas! even
this comfort is taken from me; I can never more by any embrace awake
him. He has heard the Name which I dare not utter, and never again
will he see the light until the dawn of the last day shall bring it.

"I now go hence, and you will behold me no more. All that is here in
the house I give you; my dulcimer alone will I keep. But let no one
venture to fix his habitation on the small islands that lie around
here. There dwell the little underground people whom you saw at the
festival, and I will protect them as long as I live!"

With these words Guru vanished. The next spring Orm took the golden
horn and the silverware to Drontheim, where no one knew him. The value
of these precious metals was so great that he was able to purchase
everything requisite for a wealthy man. He laded his ship with his
purchases, and returned back to the island, where he spent many years
in unalloyed happiness, and Aslog's father was soon reconciled to his
wealthy son-in-law.

The huge image remained sitting in the house; no human power was able
to move it. So hard was the stone, that hammer and axe flew in pieces
without making the slightest impression upon it. The giant sat there
till a holy man came to the island, who with one single word removed
him back to his former station, where he stands to this hour. The
copper kettle, which the underground people left behind them, was
preserved as a memorial upon the island, which bears the name of House
Island to the present day.




SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED.


A poor widow lived alone in a little cottage, in front of which was a
garden, where stood two little rose-trees: one bore white roses, the
other red. The widow had two children, who resembled the two
rose-trees: one was called Snow-white, and the other Rose-red. They
were two of the best children that ever lived; but Snow-white was
quieter and more gentle than Rose-red. Rose-red liked best to jump
about in the meadows, to look for flowers and catch butterflies; but
Snow-white sat at home with her mother, helped her in the house, or
read to her when there was nothing else to do. The two children loved
one another so much, that they always walked hand in hand; and when
Snow-white said, "We will not forsake one another," Rose-red answered,
"Never, as long as we live;" and the mother added, "Yes, my children,
whatever one has, let her divide with the other." They often ran about
in solitary places, and gathered red berries; and the wild creatures
of the wood never hurt them, but came confidingly up to them. The
little hare ate cabbage-leaves out of their hands, the doe grazed at
their side, the stag sprang merrily past them, and the birds remained
sitting on the boughs, and never ceased their songs. They met with no
accident if they loitered in the wood and right came on; they lay down
together on the moss, and slept till morning; and the mother knew
this, and was in no anxiety about them. Once, when they had spent the
night in the wood, and the red morning awoke them, they saw a
beautiful child in a shining white dress, sitting by the place where
they had slept, who, arising, and looking at them kindly, said
nothing, but went into the wood. And when they looked round, they
found out that they had been sleeping close to a precipice, and would
certainly have fallen down it if they had gone a few steps farther in
the dark. Their mother told them it must have been the angel that
takes care of good children who had sat by them all night long.

Snow-white and Rose-red kept their mother's cottage so clean, that it
was a pleasure to look into it. In the summer, Rose-red managed the
house, and every morning she gathered a nosegay in which was a rose
off each tree, and set it by her mother's bed before she awoke. In
winter Snow-white lighted the fire, and hung the kettle on the hook;
and though it was only copper, it shone like gold, it was rubbed so
clean. In the evening, when the snow fell, the mother said, "Go,
Snow-white, and bolt the door;" and then they seated themselves on the
hearth, and the mother took her spectacles, and read aloud out of a
great book, and the two girls listened, and sat and span. Near them
lay a lamb on the floor, and behind them, on a perch, sat a white
dove, with its head under its wing.

One evening, as they were thus happy together, some one knocked to be
let in. The mother said, "Quick, Rose-red, open the door; perhaps it
is a traveller who seeks shelter." Rose-red went and pushed the bolt
back, and thought it was a poor man, but a bear stretched his thick
black head into the door. Rose-red screamed and sprang back, the
little lamb bleated, the little dove fluttered about, and Snow-white
hid herself behind her mother's bed. However, the bear began to speak,
and said, "Do not be frightened, I will do you no harm; I am half
frozen, and only want to warm myself a little."

"You poor bear," said the mother, "lay yourself down before the fire,
only take care your fur does not burn." Then she called out,
"Snow-white and Rose-red, come out; the bear will not hurt you--he
means honestly by us." Then they both came out, and, by degrees, the
lamb and the dove also approached, and ceased to be afraid. The bear
said, "Children, knock the snow a little out of my fur;" and they
fetched a broom, and swept the bear's skin clean; and he stretched
himself before the fire and growled softly, like a bear that was quite
happy and comfortable. In a short time, they all became quite friendly
together, and the children played tricks with the awkward guest. They
pulled his hair, set their feet on his back, and rolled him here and
there; or took a hazel rod and beat him, and when he growled they
laughed. The bear was very much pleased with this frolic, only, when
they became too mischievous, he called out, "Children, leave me
alone."

    "Little Snow-white and Rose-red,
    You will strike your lover dead."

When bedtime came, and the others went to sleep, the mother said to
the bear: "You can lie there on the hearth, and then you will be
sheltered from the cold and the bad weather." At daybreak the two
children let him out, and he trotted over the snow into the wood.
Henceforward, the bear came every evening at the same hour, laid
himself on the hearth, and allowed the children to play with him as
much as they liked; and they became so used to him, that the door was
never bolted until their black companion had arrived. When spring
came, and everything was green out of doors, the bear said one morning
to Snow-white: "Now I must go away, and may not come again the whole
summer."

"Where are you going, dear Bear?" asked Snow-white.

"I must go into the wood, and guard my treasures from the bad dwarfs;
in winter, when the ground is frozen hard, they have to stay
underneath, and cannot work their way through, but now that the sun
has thawed and warmed the earth, they break through, come up, seek,
and steal: what is once in their hands, and lies in their caverns,
does not come so easily into daylight again." Snow-white was quite
sorrowful at parting, and as she unbolted the door for him, and the
bear ran out, the hook of the door caught him, and a piece of his skin
tore off; it seemed to Snow-white as if she had seen gold shining
through, but she was not sure. But the bear ran quickly away, and soon
disappeared behind the trees.

After some time, their mother sent the children into the wood to
collect faggots. They found there a large tree, which had been cut
down and lay on the ground, and by the trunk something was jumping up
and down, but they could not tell what it was. As they came nearer,
they saw that it was a dwarf, with an old withered face, and a
snow-white beard a yard long. The end of the beard was stuck fast in a
cleft in the tree, and the little fellow jumped about like a dog on a
rope, and did not know how to help himself. He stared at the girls
with his fiery red eyes, and screamed out, "Why do you stand there!
Can't you come and render me some assistance?"

"What is the matter with you, little man?" asked Rose-red.

"Stupid little goose!" answered the dwarf; "I wanted to chop the tree,
so as to have some small pieces of wood for the kitchen; we only want
little bits; with thick logs, the small quantity of food that we cook
for ourselves--we are not, like you, great greedy people--burns
directly. I had driven the wedge well in, and it was all going on
right, but the detestable wood was too smooth, and sprang out
unexpectedly; and the tree closed up so quickly, that I could not pull
my beautiful white beard out; now it is sticking there, and I can't
get away. There you foolish, soft, milk-faces! you are laughing and
crying out, 'How ugly you are! how ugly you are!'"

The children took a great deal of trouble, but they could not pull the
beard out; it stuck too fast.

"I will run and fetch somebody," said Rose red.

"You great ninny!" snarled the dwarf, "you want to call more people;
you are two too many for me now. Can't you think of anything better?"

"Only don't be impatient," said Snow-white, "I have thought of
something;" and she took her little scissors out of her pocket, and
cut the end of the beard off.

As soon as the dwarf felt himself free, he seized a sack filled with
gold that was sticking between the roots of the tree; pulling it out,
he growled to himself, "You rude people, to cut off a piece of my
beautiful beard! May evil reward you!" Then he threw his sack over his
shoulders and walked away, without once looking at the children.

Some time afterwards, Snow-white and Rose red wished to catch some
fish for dinner. As they came near to the stream, they saw that
something like a grasshopper was jumping towards the water, as if it
were going to spring in. They ran on and recognised the dwarf.

"Where are you going?" asked Rose-red, "You don't want to go into the
water?"

"I am not such a fool as that," cried the dwarf, "Don't you see the
detestable fish wants to pull me in?"

The little fellow had been sitting there fishing, and, unluckily, the
wind had entangled his beard with the line. When directly afterwards a
great fish bit at his hook, the weak creature could not pull him out,
so the fish was pulling the dwarf into the water. It is true he caught
hold of all the reeds and rushes, but that did not help him much; he
had to follow all the movements of the fish, and was in imminent
danger of being drowned. The girls, coming at the right time, held him
fast and tried to get the beard loose from the line, but in
vain--beard and line were entangled fast together. There was nothing
to do but to pull out the scissors and to cut off the beard, in doing
which a little piece of it was lost. When the dwarf saw that, he cried
out: "Is that manners, you goose! to disfigure one's face so? Is it
not enough that you once cut my beard shorter? But now you have cut
the best part of it off, I dare not be seen by my people. I wish you
had had to run, and had lost the soles of your shoes!" Then he fetched
a sack of pearls that lay among the rushes, and, without saying a word
more, he dragged it away and disappeared behind a stone.

Soon after, the mother sent the two girls to the town to buy cotton,
needles, cord, and tape. The road led them by a heath, scattered over
which lay great masses of rock. There they saw a large bird hovering
in the air; it flew round and round just above them, always sinking
lower and lower, and at last it settled down by a rock not far
distant. Directly after, they heard a piercing, wailing cry. They ran
up, and saw with horror that the eagle had seized their old
acquaintance the dwarf, and was going to carry him off. The
compassionate children instantly seized hold of the little man, held
him fast, and struggled so long that the eagle let his prey go.

When the dwarf had recovered from his first fright, he called out, in
his shrill voice: "Could not you deal rather more gently with me? You
have torn my thin coat all in tatters, awkward, clumsy creatures that
you are!" Then he took a sack of precious stones, and slipped behind
the rock again into his den. The girls, who were used to his
ingratitude, went on their way, and completed their business in the
town. As they were coming home again over the heath, they surprised
the dwarf, who had emptied his sack of precious stones on a little
clean place, and had not thought that any one would come by there so
late. The evening sun shone on the glittering stones, which looked so
beautiful in all their colours, that the children could not help
standing still to gaze.

"Why do you stand there gaping?" cried the dwarf, his ash-coloured
face turning vermilion with anger.

With these cross words he was going away, when he heard a loud
roaring, and a black bear trotted out of the wood towards them. The
dwarf sprang up terrified, but he could not get to his lurking hole
again--the bear was already close upon him. Then he called out in
anguish,--

"Dear Mr. Bear, spare me, and you shall have all my treasures; look
at the beautiful precious stones that lie there. Give me my life! for
what do you want with a poor thin little fellow like me? You would
scarcely feel me between your teeth. Rather seize those two wicked
girls; they will be tender morsels for you, as fat as young quails;
pray, eat them at once."

The bear, without troubling himself to answer, gave the malicious
creature one single stroke with his paw, and he did not move again.
The girls had run away, but the bear called after them, "Snow-white
and Rose-red, do not be frightened; wait, I will go with you.
Recognising the voice of their old friend, they stood still, and when
the bear came up to them his skin suddenly fell off; and behold he was
not a bear, but a handsome young man dressed all in gold.

"I am a king's son," said he; "I was changed by the wicked dwarf, who
had stolen all my treasures, into a wild bear, and obliged to run
about in the wood until I should be freed by his death. Now he has
received his well-deserved punishment."

So they all went home together to the widow's cottage, and Snow-white
was married to the prince, and Rose-red to his brother. They divided
between them the great treasures which the dwarf had amassed. The old
mother lived many quiet and happy years with her children; but when
she left her cottage for the palace, she took the two rose-trees with
her, and they stood before her window and bore every year the most
beautiful roses--one white and the other red.




JACK AND THE BEAN-STALK.


In the days of King Alfred, there lived a poor woman, whose cottage
was in a remote country village, many miles from London. She had been
a widow some years, and had an only child named Jack, whom she
indulged so much that he never paid the least attention to anything
she said, but was indolent, careless, and extravagant. His follies
were not owing to a bad disposition, but to his mother's foolish
partiality. By degrees, he spent all that she had--scarcely anything
remained but a cow. One day, for the first time in her life, she
reproached him: "Cruel, cruel boy! you have at last brought me to
beggary. I have not money enough to purchase even a bit of bread;
nothing now remains to sell but my poor cow! I am sorry to part with
her; it grieves me sadly, but we cannot starve." For a few minutes
Jack felt remorse, but it was soon over; and he began asking his
mother to let him sell the cow at the next village; teasing her so
much, that she at last consented. As he was going along he met a
butcher, who inquired why he was driving the cow from home? Jack
replied, he was going to sell it. The butcher held some curious beans
in his hat; they were of various colors, and attracted Jack's
attention; this did not pass unnoticed by the man, who, knowing
Jack's easy temper, thought now was the time to take an advantage of
it; and, determined not to let slip so good an opportunity, asked what
was the price of the cow, offering at the same time all the beans in
his hat for her. The silly boy could not conceal the pleasure he felt
at what he supposed so great an offer: the bargain was struck
instantly, and the cow exchanged for a few paltry beans. Jack made the
best of his way home, calling aloud to his mother before he reached
the door, thinking to surprise her.

When she saw the beans, and heard Jack's account, her patience quite
forsook her: she tossed the beans out of the window, where they fell
on the garden-bed below. Then she threw her apron over her head, and
cried bitterly. Jack attempted to console her, but in vain, and, not
having anything to eat, they both went supperless to bed. Jack awoke
early in the morning, and seeing something uncommon darkening the
window of his bedchamber, ran downstairs into the garden, where he
found some of the beans had taken root, and sprung up surprisingly:
the stalks were of an immense thickness, and had twined together until
they formed a ladder like a chain, and so high that the top appeared
to be lost in the clouds. Jack was an adventurous lad; he determined
to climb up to the top, and ran to tell his mother, not doubting but
that she would be equally pleased with himself. She declared he should
not go; said it would break her heart if he did--entreated and
threatened, but all in vain. Jack set out, and after climbing for
some hours, reached the top of the bean-stalk, quite exhausted.
Looking around, he found himself in a strange country; it appeared to
be a barren desert--not a tree, shrub, house, or living creature was
to be seen; here and there were scattered fragments of stone; and at
unequal distances, small heaps of earth were loosely thrown together.

Jack seated himself pensively upon a block of stone, and thought of
his mother; he reflected with sorrow upon his disobedience in climbing
the bean-stalk against her will, and concluded that he must die of
hunger. However, he walked on, hoping to see a house, where he might
beg something to eat and drink. He did not find it; but he saw at a
distance a beautiful lady, walking all alone. She was elegantly clad,
and carried a white wand, at the top of which sat a peacock of pure
gold.

Jack, who was a gallant fellow, went straight up to her; when, with a
bewitching smile, she asked him how he came there. He told her all
about the bean-stalk. The lady answered him by a question, "Do you
remember your father, young man?"

"No, madam; but I am sure there is some mystery about him, for when I
name him to my mother she always begins to weep, and will tell me
nothing."

"She dare not," replied the lady, "but I can and will. For know, young
man, that I am a fairy, and was your father's guardian. But fairies
are bound by laws as well as mortals; and by an error of mine I lost
my power for a term of years, so that I was unable to succour your
father when he most needed it, and he died." Here the fairy looked so
sorrowful that Jack's heart warmed to her, and he begged her earnestly
to tell him more.

"I will; only you must promise to obey me in everything, or you will
perish yourself."

Jack was brave, and, besides, his fortunes were so bad they could not
well be worse--so he promised.

The fairy continued: "Your father, Jack, was a most excellent,
amiable, generous man. He had a good wife, faithful servants, plenty
of money; but he had one misfortune--a false friend. This was a giant,
whom he had succoured in misfortune, and who returned his kindness by
murdering him, and seizing on all his property; also making your
mother take a solemn oath that she would never tell you anything about
your father, or he would murder both her and you. Then he turned her
off with you in her arms, to wander about the wide world as she might.
I could not help her, as my power only returned on the day you went to
sell your cow."

"It was I," added the fairy, "who impelled you to take the beans, who
made the bean-stalk grow, and inspired you with the desire to climb up
it to this strange country; for it is here the wicked giant lives who
was your father's destroyer. It is you who must avenge him, and rid
the world of a monster who never will do anything but evil. I will
assist you. You may lawfully take possession of his house and all his
riches, for everything he has belonged to your father, and is
therefore yours. Now farewell! Do not let your mother know you are
acquainted with your father's history; this is my command, and if you
disobey me you will suffer for it. Now go."

Jack asked where he was to go.

"Along the direct road, till you see the house where the giant lives.
You must then act according to your own just judgment, and I will
guide you if any difficulty arises. Farewell!"

She bestowed on the youth a benignant smile, and vanished.

Jack pursued his journey. He walked on till after sunset, when to his
great joy, he espied a large mansion. A plain-looking woman was at the
door: he accosted her, begging she would give him a morsel of bread
and a night's lodging. She expressed the greatest surprise, and said
it was quite uncommon to see a human being near their house; for it
was well known that her husband was a powerful giant, who would never
eat anything but human flesh, if he could possibly get it; that he
would walk fifty miles to procure it, usually being out the whole day
for that purpose.

This account greatly terrified Jack, but still he hoped to elude the
giant, and therefore he again entreated the woman to take him in for
one night only, and hide him where she thought proper. She at last
suffered herself to be persuaded, for she was of a compassionate and
generous disposition, and took him into the house. First, they entered
a fine large hall, magnificently furnished; they then passed through
several spacious rooms, in the same style of grandeur; but all
appeared forsaken and desolate. A long gallery came next; it was very
dark--just light enough to show that, instead of a wall on one side,
there was a grating of iron which parted off a dismal dungeon, from
whence issued the groans of those victims whom the cruel giant
reserved in confinement for his own voracious appetite. Poor Jack was
half dead with fear, and would have given the world to have been with
his mother again, for he now began to doubt if he should ever see her
more; he even mistrusted the good woman, and thought she had let him
into the house for no other purpose than to lock him up among the
unfortunate people in the dungeon. However, she bade Jack sit down,
and gave him plenty to eat and drink; and he, not seeing anything to
make him uncomfortable, soon forgot his fear and was just beginning to
enjoy himself, when he was startled by a loud knocking at the outer
door, which made the whole house shake.

"Ah! that's the giant; and if he sees you he will kill you and me
too," cried the poor woman, trembling all over. "What shall I do?"

"Hide me in the oven," cried Jack, now as bold as a lion at the
thought of being face to face with his father's cruel murderer. So he
crept into the oven--for there was no fire near it--and listened to
the giant's loud voice and heavy step as he went up and down the
kitchen scolding his wife. At last he seated himself at table, and
Jack, peeping through a crevice in the oven, was amazed to see what a
quantity of food he devoured. It seemed as if he never would have done
eating and drinking; but he did at last, and, leaning back, called to
his wife in a voice like thunder:

"Bring me my hen!"

She obeyed, and placed upon the table a very beautiful live hen.

"Lay!" roared the giant, and the hen laid immediately an egg of solid
gold.

"Lay another!" and every time the giant said this the hen laid a
larger egg than before.

He amused himself a long time with his hen, and then sent his wife to
bed, while he fell asleep by the fireside, and snored like the roaring
of cannon.

As soon as he was asleep, Jack crept out of the oven, seized the hen,
and ran off with her. He got safely out of the house, and finding his
way along the road he came, reached the top of the bean-stalk, which
he descended in safety.

His mother was overjoyed to see him. She thought he had come to some
ill end.

"Not a bit of it, mother. Look here!" and he showed her the hen. "Now
lay;" and the hen obeyed him as readily as the giant, and laid as many
golden eggs as he desired.

These eggs being sold, Jack and his mother got plenty of money, and
for some months lived very happily together; till Jack got another
great longing to climb the bean-stalk, and carry away some more of the
giant's riches. He had told his mother of his adventure, but had been
very careful not to say a word about his father. He thought of his
journey again and again, but still he could not summon resolution
enough to break it to his mother, being well assured that she would
endeavour to prevent his going. However, one day he told her boldly,
that he must take another journey up the bean-stalk; she begged and
prayed him not to think of it, and tried all in her power to dissuade
him. She told him that the giant's wife would certainly know him
again, and that the giant would desire nothing better than to get him
into his power, that he might put him to a cruel death, in order to be
revenged for the loss of his hen. Jack, finding that all his arguments
were useless, ceased speaking, though resolved to go at all events. He
had a dress prepared which would disguise him, and something to colour
his skin; he thought it impossible for any one to recollect him in
this dress.

A few mornings after, he rose very early, and, unperceived by any one,
climbed the bean-stalk a second time. He was greatly fatigued when he
reached the top, and very hungry. Having rested some time on one of
the stones, he pursued his journey to the giant's mansion, which he
reached late in the evening: the woman was at the door as before. Jack
addressed her, at the same time telling her a pitiful tale, and
requesting that she would give him some victuals and drink, and also a
night's lodging.

She told him (what he knew before very well) about her husband's being
a powerful and cruel giant, and also that she had one night admitted a
poor, hungry, friendless boy; that the little ungrateful fellow had
stolen one of the giant's treasures; and ever since that her husband
had been worse than before, using her very cruelly, and continually
upbraiding her with being the cause of his misfortune. Jack felt sorry
for her, but confessed nothing, and did his best to persuade her to
admit him, but found it a very hard task. At last she consented, and
as she led the way, Jack observed that everything was just as he had
found it before: she took him into the kitchen, and after he had done
eating and drinking, she hid him in an old lumber-closet. The giant
returned at the usual time, and walked in so heavily, that the house
was shaken to its foundation. He seated himself by the fire, and soon
after exclaimed: "Wife, I smell fresh meat!"

The wife replied it was the crows, which had brought a piece of raw
meat, and left it at the top of the house. While supper was preparing,
the giant was very ill-tempered and impatient, frequently lifting up
his hand to strike his wife for not being quick enough. He was also
continually upbraiding her with the loss of his wonderful hen.

At last, having ended his supper, he cried, "Give me something to
amuse me--my harp or my money-bags."

"Which will you have, my dear?" said the wife, humbly.

"My money-bags, because they are the heaviest to carry," thundered he.

She brought them, staggering under the weight: two bags--one filled
with new guineas, and the other with new shillings; she emptied them
out on the table, and the giant began counting them in great glee.
"Now you may go to bed, you old fool." So the wife crept away.

Jack from his hiding-place watched the counting of the money, which he
knew was his poor father's, and wished it was his own; it would give
him much less trouble than going about selling the golden eggs. The
giant, little thinking he was so narrowly observed, reckoned it all
up, and then replaced it in the two bags, which he tied up very
carefully and put beside his chair, with his little dog to guard them.
At last he fell asleep as before, and snored so loud, that Jack
compared his noise to the roaring of the sea in a high wind, when the
tide is coming in. At last Jack, concluding all secure, stole out, in
order to carry off the two bags of money; but just as he laid his hand
upon one of them, the little dog, which he had not perceived before,
started from under the giant's chair and barked most furiously.
Instead of endeavouring to escape, Jack stood still, though expecting
his enemy to awake every instant. Contrary, however, to his
expectation, the giant continued in a sound sleep, and Jack, seeing a
piece of meat, threw it to the dog, who at once ceased barking, and
began to devour it. So Jack carried off the bags, one on each
shoulder, but they were so heavy that it took him two whole days to
descend the bean-stalk and get back to his mother's door.

When he came he found the cottage deserted. He ran from one room to
another, without being able to find any one; he then hastened into the
village, hoping to see some of the neighbours, who could inform him
where he could find his mother. An old woman at last directed him to a
neighbouring house, where she was ill of a fever. He was greatly
shocked at finding her apparently dying, and blamed himself bitterly
as the cause of it all. However, at sight of her dear son, the poor
woman revived, and slowly recovered health. Jack gave her his two
money-bags; they had the cottage rebuilt and well furnished, and lived
happier than they had ever done before.

For three years Jack heard no more of the bean-stalk, but he could not
forget it, though he feared making his mother unhappy. It was in vain
endeavouring to amuse himself; he became thoughtful, and would arise
at the first dawn of day, and sit looking at the bean-stalk for hours
together. His mother saw that something preyed upon his mind, and
endeavoured to discover the cause; but Jack knew too well what the
consequence would be should she succeed. He did his utmost, therefore,
to conquer the great desire he had for another journey up the
bean-stalk. Finding, however, that his inclination grew too powerful
for him, he began to make secret preparations for his journey. He got
ready a new disguise, better and more complete than the former; and
when summer came, on the longest day he awoke as soon as it was light,
and without telling his mother, ascended the bean-stalk. He found the
road, journey, &c., much as it was on the two former times. He arrived
at the giant's mansion in the evening, and found the wife standing, as
usual, at the door. Jack had disguised himself so completely, that she
did not appear to have the least recollection of him; however, when he
pleaded hunger and poverty, in order to gain admittance, he found it
very difficult indeed to persuade her. At last he prevailed, and was
concealed in the copper. When the giant returned, he said furiously,
"I smell fresh meat!" But Jack felt quite composed, as he had said so
before, and had been soon satisfied. However, the giant started up
suddenly, and, notwithstanding all his wife could say, he searched all
round the room. Whilst this was going forward, Jack was exceedingly
terrified, wishing himself at home a thousand times; but when the
giant approached the copper, and put his hand upon the lid, Jack
thought his death was certain. However, nothing happened; for the
giant did not take the trouble to lift up the lid, but sat down
shortly by the fireside, and began to eat his enormous supper. When he
had finished, he commanded his wife to fetch down his harp. Jack
peeped under the copper-lid, and saw a most beautiful harp. The giant
placed it on the table, said "Play!" and it played of its own accord,
without anybody touching it, the most exquisite music imaginable.
Jack, who was a very good musician, was delighted, and more anxious to
get this than any other of his enemy's treasures. But the giant not
being particularly fond of music, the harp had only the effect of
lulling him to sleep earlier than usual. As for the wife, she had gone
to bed as soon as ever she could.

As soon as he thought all was safe, Jack got out of the copper, and
seizing the harp, was eagerly running off with it. But the harp was
enchanted by a fairy, and as soon as it found itself in strange hands,
it called out loudly, just as if it had been alive, "Master! Master!"

The giant awoke, started up, and saw Jack scampering away as fast as
his legs could carry him.

"Oh you villain! it is you who have robbed me of my hen and my
money-bags, and now you are stealing my harp also. Wait till I catch
you, and I'll eat you up alive!"

"Very well; try!" shouted Jack, who was not a bit afraid, for he saw
the giant was so tipsy he could hardly stand, much less run; and he
himself had young legs and a clear conscience, which carry a man a
long way. So, after leading the giant a considerable race, he
contrived to be first at the top of the bean-stalk, and then scrambled
down it as fast as he could, the harp playing all the while the most
melancholy music till he said, "Stop," and it stopped.

Arrived at the bottom, he found his mother sitting at her
cottage-door, weeping silently.

"Here, mother, don't cry; just give me a hatchet; make haste." For he
knew there was not a moment to spare; he saw the giant beginning to
descend the bean-stalk.

However, it was too late--the monster's ill deeds had come to an end.
Jack with his hatchet cut the bean-stalk close off at the root; the
giant fell headlong into the garden, and was killed on the spot.

Instantly the fairy appeared, and explained everything to Jack's
mother, begging her to forgive Jack, who was his father's own son for
bravery and generosity, and who would be sure to make her happy for
the rest of her days.

So all ended well, and nothing was ever beard or seen of the wonderful
Bean-stalk.




GRACIOSA AND PERCINET.


Once upon a time there lived a king and queen, who had an only
daughter. Her incomparable beauty, sweetness, and intelligence caused
her to be named Graciosa. She was all her mother's joy. Every day she
had given her a different dress, of gold brocade, velvet, or satin;
yet she was neither conceited nor boastful. She used to pass her
mornings in study, and in the afternoon she sat sewing by the queen's
side. She had, however, plenty of play-time, and sweetmeats without
end, so that she was altogether the happiest princess alive.

At the same court was an elderly young lady named Duchess Grognon, who
was the very opposite of Graciosa. Her hair was fiery red, her face
fat and spotty, and she had but one eye. Her mouth was so big that you
might have thought she could eat you up, only she had no teeth to do
it with; she was also humpbacked and lame. Of course she could not
help her ugliness, and nobody would have disliked her for that, if she
had not been of such an unpleasant temper that she hated everything
sweet and beautiful, and especially Graciosa. She had also a very good
opinion of herself, and when any one praised the princess, would say
angrily, "That is a lie! My little finger is worth her whole body."

In course of time the queen fell sick and died, and her daughter was
almost broken-hearted. So was her husband for a year, and then he
began to comfort himself by hunting. One day, after a long chase, he
came to a strange castle, which happened to be that of the Duchess
Grognon. She, informed of his approach, went out to meet him, and
received him most respectfully. As he was very hot with hunting, she
took him into the coolest place in the palace, which was a vaulted
cave, most elegantly furnished, where there were two hundred barrels
arranged in long rows.

"Madam, are these all yours?" inquired the king.

"Yes, sire, but I shall be most happy if you will condescend to taste
their contents. Which wine do you prefer--canary, hermitage,
champagne?" and she ran over a long list, out of which his majesty
made his choice.

Grognon took a little hammer, and struck "toc, toc," on the cask, from
which there rolled out a handful of silver money. "Nay, what is this?"
said she, smiling, and passed on to the next, from which, when she
tapped it, out poured a stream of gold coins. "I never saw the
like--what nonsense!" and she tried the third, out of which came a
heap of pearls and diamonds, so that the floor of the cave was strewn
with them. "Sire," she exclaimed, "some one has robbed me of my good
wine, and put this rubbish in its place."

"Rubbish, madam! Why, such rubbish would buy my whole kingdom."

"It is yours, sire," replied the duchess, "if you will make me your
queen."

The king, who was a great lover of money, replied eagerly, "Certainly,
madam, I'll marry you to-morrow if you will."

Grognon, highly delighted, made but one other condition--that she
should have the Princess Graciosa entirely in her own rule and power,
just as if she had been her real mother; to which the foolish king
consented, for he thought much more of riches than he did of his
child. So he and Grognon departed hand in hand out of the cave, very
well pleased.

When the king returned home, Graciosa ran out with joy to welcome her
father, and asked him if he had had good sport in his hunting.

"Yes, my child," said he, "for I have taken a dove alive."

"Oh, give it me, and I will nourish and cherish it," cried the
princess.

"That is impossible; for it is the Duchess Grognon, whom I have
promised to marry."

"She a dove!--she is rather a hawk," sighed the princess in despair;
but her father bade her hold her tongue, and promise to love her
stepmother, who would have over her all the authority of a mother, and
to whom he wished to present her that very day.

The obedient princess went to her apartment, where her nurse soon
found out the sorrow in her face, and its cause.

"My child," said the good old woman, "princesses ought to show a good
example to humbler women. Promise me to do your best to please your
father, and to make yourself agreeable to the stepmother he has
chosen for you. She may not be so bad after, all."

And the nurse gave so much good advice, that Graciosa began to smile,
and dressed herself in her best attire, a green robe embroidered with
gold; while her fair, loose-falling hair was adorned, according to the
fashion of the day, with a coronet of jasmine, of which the leaves
were made of large emeralds.

Grognon, on her part, made the best of herself that was possible. She
put on a high-heeled shoe to appear less lame, she padded her
shoulders, dyed her red hair black, and put in a false eye; then
dressed herself in a hooped petticoat of violet satin trimmed with
blue, and an upper gown of yellow with green ribands. In this costume,
she wished to enter the city on horseback, as she understood the
queens were in the habit of doing.

Meantime, Graciosa waited in fear the moment of her arrival, and, to
pass the time away, she went all alone into a little wood, where she
sobbed and wept in secret, until suddenly there appeared before her a
young page, whom she had never seen before.

"Who are you?" she inquired; "and when did his majesty take you into
his service?"

"Princess," said the page, bowing, "I am in no one's service but your
own. I am Percinet, a prince in my own country, so that there is no
inequality of rank between us. I have loved you long, and seen you
often, for I have the fairy gift of making myself invisible. I might
longer have concealed myself from you, but for your present sorrow,
in which, however, I hope to be of both comfort and assistance--a page
and yet a prince, and your faithful lover."

At these words, at once tender and respectful, the princess, who had
long heard of the fairy-prince Percinet, felt so happy that she feared
Grognon no more. They talked a little while together, and then
returned to the palace, where the page assisted her to mount her
horse; on which she looked so beautiful, that all the new queen's
splendours faded into nothing in comparison, and not one of the
courtiers had eyes for any except Graciosa.

As soon as Grognon saw it, "What!" cried she, "has this creature the
impudence to be better mounted than myself! Descend, Miss, and let me
try your horse;--and your page, whom everybody thinks so much of, bid
him come and hold my bridle."

Prince Percinet, who was the page, cast one look at his fair Graciosa
and obeyed; but no sooner had the duchess mounted, than the horse ran
away with her and dragged her over briers, stones, and mud, and
finally threw her into a deep ditch. Her head was cut in several
places, and her arm fractured. They picked her up in little pieces,
like a broken wineglass; never was there a poor bride in worse plight.
But in spite of her sufferings her malice remained. She sent for the
king:

"This is all Graciosa's fault; she wished to kill me. I desire that
your majesty will punish her, or leave me to do it--else I will
certainly be revenged upon you both."

The king, afraid of losing his casks full of gold pieces, consented,
and Graciosa was commanded to appear. She came trembling and looking
round vainly for Prince Percinet. The cruel Grognon ordered four
women, ugly as witches, to take her and strip off her fine clothes,
and whip her with rods till her white shoulders were red with blood.
But lo! as soon as the rods touched her, they turned into bundles of
feathers, and the women tired themselves to death with whipping,
without hurting Graciosa the least in the world!

"Ah! kind Percinet, what do I not owe you? What should I do without
you!" sighed the princess, when she was taken back to her own chamber
and her nurse. And then she saw the prince standing before her, in his
green dress and his white plume, the most charming of pages.

Percinet advised her to pretend illness on account of the cruel
treatment she was supposed to have received; which so delighted
Grognon, that she got well all the sooner, and the marriage was
celebrated with great splendour.

Soon after, the king, who knew that his wife's weak point was her
vanity, gave a tournament, at which he ordered the six bravest knights
of the court to proclaim that Queen Grognon was the fairest lady
alive. No knight ventured to dispute this fact, until there appeared
one who carried a little box adorned with diamonds, and proclaimed
aloud that Grognon was the ugliest woman in the universe, and that the
most beautiful was she whose portrait was in the box. He opened it,
and behold the image of the Princess Graciosa!

The princess, who sat behind her stepmother, felt sure that the
unknown knight was Percinet; but she dared say nothing. The contest
was fixed for next day; but in the meantime, Grognon, wild with anger,
commanded Graciosa to be taken in the middle of the night to a forest
a hundred leagues distant, full of wolves, lions, tigers, and bears.
In vain the poor maiden implored that the attendants would kill her at
once, rather than leave her in that dreadful place: the queen's orders
must be obeyed; no answer was made to her, but the servants remounted
and rode away. Graciosa, in solitude and darkness, groped through the
forest, sometimes falling against the trunks of trees, sometimes
tearing herself with bushes and briers; at last, overcome with fear
and grief, she sank on the ground, sobbing out, "Percinet, Percinet,
have you forsaken me?"

While she spoke, a bright light dazzled her eyes, the midnight forest
was changed into glittering alleys, at the end of which appeared a
palace of crystal, shining like the sun. She knew it was the doing of
the fairy-prince who loved her, and felt a joy mingled with fear. She
turned to fly, but saw him standing before her, more handsome and
charming than ever.

"Princess," said he, "why are you afraid of me? This is the palace of
the fairy-queen my mother, and the princesses my sisters, who will
take care of you, and love you tenderly. Enter this chariot, and I
will convey you there."

Graciosa entered, and passing through many a lovely forest glade,
where it was clear daylight, and shepherds and shepherdesses were
dancing to merry music, they reached the palace, where the queen and
her two daughters received the forlorn princess with great kindness,
and led her through many rooms of rock-crystal, glittering with
jewels, where, to her amazement, Graciosa saw the history of her own
life, even down to this adventure in the forest, painted on the walls.

"How is this?" she said. "Prince, you know everything about me."

"Yes; and I wish to preserve everything concerning you," said he
tenderly; whereupon Graciosa cast down her eyes. She was only too
happy, and afraid that she should learn to love the fairy-prince too
much.

She spent eight days in his palace--days full of every enjoyment; and
Percinet tried all the arguments he could think of to induce her to
marry him, and remain there for ever. But the good and gentle Graciosa
remembered her father who was once so kind to her, and she preferred
rather to suffer than to be wanting in duty. She entreated Percinet to
use his fairy power to send her home again, and meantime to tell her
what had become of her father.

"Come with me into the great tower there, and you shall see for
yourself."

Thereupon he took her to the top of a tower, prodigiously high, put
her little finger to his lips, and her foot upon his foot. Then he
bade her look, and she saw as hi a picture, or as in a play upon the
stage, the King and Grognon sitting together on their throne. The
latter was telling how Graciosa had hanged herself in a cave.

"She will not be much loss, sire; and as, when dead, she was far too
frightful for you to look at, I have given orders to bury her at
once."

She might well say that, for she had had a large faggot put into a
coffin, and sealed up; the king and all the nation mourned over it;
and now, that she was no more, they declared there never was such a
sweet creature as the lost princess.

The sight of her father's grief quite overcame Graciosa. "Oh,
Percinet!" she cried, "my father believes me dead. If you love me,
take me home."

The prince consented, though very sorrowfully, saying that she was as
cruel to him as Grognon was to her, and mounted with her in his
chariot, drawn by four white stags. As they quitted the courtyard,
they heard a great noise, and Graciosa saw the palace all falling to
pieces with a great crash.

"What is this?" she cried, terrified.

"Princess, my palace, which you forsake, is among the things which are
dead and gone. You will enter it no more till after your burial."

"Prince, you are angry with me," said Graciosa sorrowfully; only she
knew well that she suffered quite as much as he did in thus departing
and quitting him.

Arrived in her father's presence, she had great difficulty in
persuading him that she was not a ghost, until the coffin with the
faggot inside it was taken up, and Grognon's malice discovered But
even then, the king was so weak a man, that the queen soon made him
believe he had been cheated, that the princess was really dead, and
that this was a false Graciosa. Without more ado, he abandoned his
daughter to her stepmother's will.

Grognon, transported with joy, dragged her to a dark prison, took away
her clothes, made her dress in rags, feed on bread and water, and
sleep upon straw. Forlorn and hopeless, Graciosa dared not now call
upon Percinet; she doubted if he still loved her enough to come to her
aid.

Meantime, Grognon had sent for a fairy, who was scarcely less
malicious than herself. "I have here," said she, "a little wretch of a
girl for whom I wish to find all sorts of difficult tasks; pray assist
me in giving her a new one every day."

The fairy promised to think of it, and soon brought a skein as thick
as four persons, yet composed of thread so fine, that it broke if you
only blew upon it, and so tangled that it had neither beginning nor
end. Grognon, delighted, sent for her poor prisoner.

"There, miss, teach your clumsy fingers to unwind this skein, and if
you break a single thread I will flay you alive. Begin when you like,
but you must finish at sunset, or it will be the worse for you." Then
she sent her to her miserable cell, and treble-locked the door.

Graciosa stood dismayed, turning the skein over and over, and breaking
hundreds of threads each time. "Ah! Percinet," she cried in despair,
"come and help me, or at least receive my last farewell."

Immediately Percinet stood beside her, having entered the cell as
easily as if he carried the key in his pocket. "Behold me, princess,
ready to serve you, even though you forsook me." He touched the skein
with his wand, and it untangled itself, and wound itself up in perfect
order. "Do you wish anything more, madam?" asked he coldly.

"Percinet, Percinet, do not reproach me; I am only too unhappy."

"It is your own fault. Come with me, and make us both happy." But she
said nothing, and the fairy-prince disappeared.

At sunset, Grognon eagerly came to the prison-door with her three
keys, and found Graciosa smiling and fair, her task all done. There
was no complaint to make, yet Grognon exclaimed that the skein was
dirty, and boxed the princess's ears till her rosy cheeks turned
yellow and blue. Then she left her, and overwhelmed the fairy with
reproaches.

"Find me, by to-morrow, something absolutely impossible for her to
do."

The fairy brought a great basket full of feathers, plucked from every
kind of bird--nightingales, canaries, linnets, larks, doves, thrushes,
peacocks, ostriches, pheasants, partridges, magpies, eagles--in fact,
if I told them all over, I should never come to an end; and all these
feathers were so mixed up together, that they could not be
distinguished.

"See," said the fairy, "even one of ourselves would find it difficult
to separate these, and arrange them as belonging to each sort of bird.
Command your prisoner to do it; she is sure to fail."

Grognon jumped for joy, sent for the princess, and ordered her to take
her task, and finish it, as before, by set of sun.

Graciosa tried patiently, but she could see no difference in the
feathers; she threw them all back again into the basket, and began to
weep bitterly. "Let me die," said she, "for death only will end my
sorrows. Percinet loves me no longer; if he did, he would already have
been here."

"Here I am, my princess," cried a voice from under the basket; and the
fairy-prince appeared. He gave three taps with his wand--the feathers
flew by millions out of the basket, and arranged themselves in little
heaps, each belonging to a different bird.

"What do I not owe you?" cried Graciosa.

"Love me!" answered the prince, tenderly, and said no more.

When Grognon arrived, she found the task done. She was furious at the
fairy, who was as much astonished as herself at the result of their
malicious contrivances. But she promised to try once more; and for
several days employed all her industry in inventing a box, which, she
said, the prisoner must be forbidden on any account to open. "Then,"
added the cunning fairy, "of course, being such a disobedient and
wicked girl, as you say, she will open it, and the result will
satisfy you to your heart's content."

Grognon took the box, and commanded Graciosa to carry it to her
castle, and set it on a certain table, in an apartment she named, but
not upon any account, to open it or examine its contents.

Graciosa departed. She was dressed like any poor peasant, in a cotton
gown, a woollen hood and wooden shoes; yet, as she walked along,
people took her for a queen in disguise, so lovely were her looks and
ways. But being weak with imprisonment, she soon grew weary, and,
sitting down upon the edge of a little wood, took the box upon her
lap. Suddenly a wonderful desire seized her to open it.

"I will take nothing out, I will touch nothing," said she to herself,
"but I must see what is inside."

Without reflecting on the consequences, she lifted up the lid, and
instantly there jumped out a number of little men and little women,
carrying little tables and chairs, little dishes, and little musical
instruments. The whole company were so small, that the biggest giant
among them was scarcely the height of a finger. They leaped into the
green meadow, separated into various bands, and began dancing and
singing, eating and drinking, to Graciosa's wonder and delight. But
when she recollected herself, and wished to get them into the box
again, they all scampered away, played at hide-and-seek in the wood,
and by no means could she catch a single one.

Again, in her distress, she called upon Percinet, and again he
appeared; and, with a single touch of his wand, sent all the little
people back into the box. Then, in his chariot, drawn by stags, he
took her to the castle, where she did all that she had been commanded,
and returned in safety, to her stepmother, who was more furious than
ever. If a fairy could be strangled, Grognon certainly would have done
it in her rage. At last, she resolved to ask help no more, but to work
her own wicked will upon Graciosa.

She caused to be dug a large hole in the garden, and taking the
princess there, showed her the stone which covered it.

"Underneath this stone lies a great treasure; lift it up, and you will
see."

Graciosa obeyed; and while she was standing at the edge of the pit,
Grognon pushed her in, and let the stone fall down again upon her,
burying her alive. After this, there seemed no more hope for the poor
princess.

"O Percinet," cried she, "you are avenged. Why did I not return your
love, and marry you! Still, death will be less bitter, if only you
regret me a little."

While she spoke, she saw through the blank darkness a glimmer of
light; it came through a little door. She remembered what Percinet had
said: that she would never return to the fairy palace, until after she
was buried. Perhaps this final cruelty of Grognon would be the end of
her sorrows. So she took courage, crept through the little door, and
lo! she came out into a beautiful garden, with long alleys,
fruit-trees, and flower-beds. Well she knew it, and well she knew the
glitter of the rock-crystal walls. And there, at the palace-gate,
stood Percinet, and the queen, his mother, and the princesses, his
sisters. "Welcome, Graciosa!" cried they all; and Graciosa, after all
her sufferings, wept for joy.

The marriage was celebrated with great splendour; and all the fairies,
for a thousand leagues round, attended it. Some came in chariots drawn
by dragons, or swans, or peacocks; some were mounted upon floating
clouds, or globes of fire. Among the rest, appeared the very fairy who
had assisted Grognon to torment Graciosa. When she discovered that
Grognon's poor prisoner was now Prince Percinet's bride, she was
overwhelmed with confusion, and entreated her to forget all that had
passed, because she really was ignorant who she had been so cruelly
afflicting.

"But I will make amends for all the evil that I have done," said the
fairy; and, refusing to stay for the wedding-dinner, she remounted her
chariot, drawn by two terrible serpents, and flew to the palace of
Graciosa's father. There, before either king, or courtiers, or
ladies-in-waiting could stop her--even had they wished to do it, which
remains doubtful--she came behind the wicked Grognon, and twisted her
neck, just as a cook does a barn-door fowl. So Grognon died and was
buried, and nobody was particularly sorry for the same.




THE IRON STOVE.


In the days when magic was still of some avail, a king's son was
enchanted by an old witch, and compelled to spend his life sitting
inside a great Iron Stove in a wood. There he passed many years, and
nobody could release him.

Once a king's daughter came into the wood. She had gone astray, and
could not find her father's kingdom again; and having wandered about
for nine days, at last she stood before the Iron Stove. Then a voice
came out of it, and said, "Whence do you come, and where do you want
to go?"

She answered, "I have wandered from my father's kingdom, and lost
myself, and cannot get home again."

Then the voice spoke out of the Iron Stove: "I will help you home
again, and that, too, in a short time, if you will promise to do what
I desire. I am a greater prince than you are a princess, and I wish to
marry you."

She was very much frightened, and thought, "Oh, what shall I do! How
can I marry an Iron Stove?"

However, as she wanted very much to go home to her father, she
promised what was demanded of her. "Very well," said the voice "you
must come again, and bring a knife with you, and scrape a hole in the
iron."

And the Iron Stove gave her for a companion something, or
somebody--she was not quite sure what--who walked by her side and did
not speak, but took her safe home within two hours. Then there was
great joy in her father's palace, and the old king fell on her neck,
and kissed her many times. But she was very sorrowful, and said: "Dear
father, you little know what has happened to me; I should never have
come home again out of the great wild wood, if I had not passed by an
Iron Stove. But I had to promise faithfully that I would return back
to it, and marry it."

The old king was so terrified that he nearly fell into a swoon; for he
had only this one child. They therefore consulted together, and
decided to send, not the princess, but a miller's daughter, who was
very beautiful; and leading her out, they gave her a knife, and told
her how she was to scrape the Iron Stove. When she reached the wood,
she scraped away for four-and-twenty hours, but could not make the
slightest impression. But when day began to break, a voice in the Iron
Stove called out, "It seems to me that it is day out there."

She answered: "It seems so to me too; I think I hear my father's mill
turning."

"Oh, then, you are a miller's daughter; go straight back and send the
king's daughter here!"

Then she returned and told the old king that the Iron Stove would not
have her; he wanted the princess only. The old king was greatly
frightened, and the princess wept. But they had still a swineherd's
daughter, who was still more beautiful than the miller's girl; so they
gave her a piece of gold, in order that she might be persuaded to go,
instead of the king's daughter, to the Iron Stove. She was taken to
the wood as before, and had also to scrape for four-and-twenty hours;
but she could make no impression.

Now, when dawn broke, a voice called out of the Stove, "It seems to me
it is day out there."

Then she answered, "It seems so to me too; I think I hear my father's
little horn sounding."

"So you are the swineherd's daughter; go away directly, and bid the
king's daughter come, and tell her it shall happen to her as I
forewarned her; if she does not come, everything in the kingdom shall
fall to pieces and tumble down, and no stone remain upon another."

When the king's daughter heard this, she began to cry; but there was
nothing else to be done--she must keep her promise. She took leave of
her father, put a knife in her pocket, and went out to the Iron Stove
in the wood. When she arrived there, she began to scrape and scrape;
the iron yielded, and in two hours she had already scraped a little
hole. She looked in and saw a most beautiful youth: oh! he shone so
with gold and precious stones, that he pleased her to the very bottom
of her heart. She scraped away faster than ever, till she made the
hole so large that he was able to get out.

Then he said, "You are mine, and I am yours, you have freed me, and
you are my bride."

He wished to take her home to his kingdom, but she begged that she
might go once more to see her father; and the prince gave her leave,
on condition that she should speak no more than three words with him,
and come back again. So she went home; but, alas! being a little
chatter-box, she spoke more than three words. The Iron Stove
disappeared instantly, and was removed far away, over glass mountains
and sharp swords; but the king's son, being now freed, was not shut up
in it.

The princess took leave of her father, and took some money with her,
but not much, and went again into the great wood. There she looked
everywhere for the Iron Stove, but it was not to be found.

She sought it for nine days, until her hunger was so great that she
did not know what to do; for she had eaten all the food she could
find, and had nothing left to keep her alive. At evening-tide she
climbed up into a little tree, and purposed spending the night there,
for fear of the wild beasts. But when midnight came she saw afar off a
little glimmering light, and thinking, "Oh! there I should be safe,"
climbed down and went towards it.

Then she came to a little old house, overgrown with grass, with a
little heap of wood before the door. Wondering how it came there, she
looked in through the window, and saw nothing inside but a number of
fat little frogs, and a table beautifully spread. There were on it
roast meats and wines, and the plates and cups were all of silver. So
she took heart, and knocked. Immediately the fattest frog called out--

    "Maiden sweet and small,
    Hutzelbein I call;
      Hutzelbein's little dog.
    Creep about and see
    Who this can be."

Then a little frog came and opened the door for her; and as soon as
she came in, the frogs all bade her welcome, and persuaded her to sit
down. They asked--"Whence do you come? where do you want to go?"

Then she told them all that had happened to her, and how, because she
had disobeyed the command not to speak to her father more than three
words, the Stove had disappeared, as well as the king's son; now she
was determined to seek him, and to wander over mountain and valley
till she found him.

The old fat frog said--

    "Maiden sweet and small,
    Hutzelbein I call;
      Hutzelbein's little dog,
    Creep about and see;
    Bring the great box to me."

Then the little frog went and brought the box. Afterwards they gave
the princess food and drink, and took her to a beautifully-made bed,
all of silk and velvet; she laid herself in it, and slept peacefully.

When day came she arose, and the old frog gave her three needles out
of the great box, and told her to take them with her. They would be
very necessary to her, for she would have to go over a high glass
mountain, and three sharp swords, and a great sea; if she passed all
those, she would recover her dearest prince. The frog also gave her,
besides the three needles, other gifts, which she was to take great
care of--namely, a plough-wheel, and three nuts.

With these she set off, and when she came to the slippery glass
mountain, she stuck the three needles into it as she walked--some
before her feet, and some behind--and so managed to get across. When
she was on the other side, she hid the needles, in a place which she
had noticed particularly, and went on her way. Afterwards she came to
the sharp-cutting swords, but she set herself on her plough-wheel and
rolled safely over them. At last she came before a great lake, which
she had to sail across, and when she had done so she saw a great
castle. She went in and said she was a poor maiden, who wished very
much to hire herself out, if she might be taken in there as a servant.
For the frogs had told her that the king's son, whom she had released
out of the Iron Stove in the great wood, dwelt there; so she was
content to be taken as kitchen-maid, for very small pay.

Now the king's son had thought the princess was dead; and there was
now with him another maiden, whom he had been persuaded he ought to
marry, which grieved the poor kitchen-maid very much.

In the evening, when she had washed up the dishes, and had done all
her work, she felt in her pocket, and found the three nuts which the
old frog had given her. She bit one open, and was going to eat the
kernel, when, behold, inside it was the most beautiful dress
imaginable--so beautiful that the bride soon heard of it, came and
asked to see it, and wanted to buy it, saying it was no dress for a
kitchen-maid. But the kitchen-maid thought differently, and refused to
sell it, but offered to give it as a present, if the bride would grant
her one favour--namely, to sleep one night on the mat outside the
bridegroom's door. The bride gave her leave, because the dress was so
beautiful, and she had none like it.

Now when it was evening, she said to her bridegroom: "The foolish
kitchen-maid wants to sleep on the mat outside your door."

"If you are content, I am," said he.

But the bride gave him a glass of wine, in which she had put a
sleeping draught; so that he slept so soundly, nothing could wake him.
While, outside the door, the princess wept the whole night, saying: "I
have released you out of the wild wood--out of an Iron Stove; in
seeking you, I have gone over a glass mountain, over three sharp
swords, and over a great lake; yet, now that I find you, you will not
hear me."

Next evening, when she had washed up everything, she bit the second
nut open; and inside it was a far more beautiful dress than the first
which, when the bride saw, she wished to buy also. But the girl again
refused to take money and again begged that she might spend the night
outside the bridegroom's door. Once more, the bride gave him a
sleeping-draught, and he slept so soundly, that he could hear nothing.
But the kitchen-maid wept the whole night long, crying: "I have
released you out of a wild wood, and out of an Iron Stove; and have
gone over a glass mountain, over three sharp swords, and over a great
lake, before I found you; and yet, when I find you, you will not hear
me."

The third evening, she bit open the third nut; and there was in it a
still more beautiful dress, which shone stiff with pure gold. When the
bride saw it, she wished more earnestly than ever to have it; but the
kitchen-maid would only give it to her on condition that she might
sleep, for the third time, on the mat at the bridegroom's door. But
this time the prince was cautious, and left the sleeping-draught
untouched. Now, when she began to weep, and to call out, "Dearest
treasure, I have released you out of the horrible wild wood, and out
of an Iron Stove," the king's son sprang up, crying out: "This is my
right true love--she is mine, and I am hers." Then he declared he
would not marry the other bride, whom he did not love; and so, still
in the middle of the night, he got into a carriage with the
kitchen-maid, and drove away.

When they came to the great lake, they sailed over; and at the three
sharp swords, they seated themselves on the plough-wheel; and at the
glass mountain, they found the three needles, and stuck them in step
by step. So they came at last to the little old house; but, as they
went in, lo! it changed to a great castle; the frogs turned to
princes and princesses, all kings' children, and received them both
with great joy. There the wedding was celebrated, and they remained in
the castle, which was much larger than that which belonged to the
princess's father. But as the old man lamented very much his
daughter's loss, and his own loneliness, they soon went and fetched
him home to themselves. So they had two kingdoms, instead of one, and
lived happily together all their days.




THE INVISIBLE PRINCE.


There was a king and queen who were dotingly fond of their only son,
notwithstanding that he was equally deformed in mind and person. The
king was quite sensible of the evil disposition of his son, but the
queen, in her excessive fondness, saw no fault whatever in her dear
Furibon, as he was named. The surest way to win her favour was to
praise Furibon for charms he did not possess. When he came of age to
have a governor, the king made choice of a prince who had an ancient
right to the crown, but was not able to support it. This prince had a
son, named Leander, handsome, accomplished, amiable--in every respect
the opposite of Prince Furibon. The two were frequently together,
which only made the deformed prince more repulsive.

One day, certain ambassadors having arrived from a far country, the
princes stood in a gallery to see them; when, taking Leander for the
king's son, they made their obeisance to him, treating Furibon as a
mere dwarf, at which the latter was so offended that he drew his
sword, and would have done them a mischief had not the king just then
appeared. As it was, the affair produced a quarrel, which ended in
Leander's being sent to a far-away castle belonging to his father.

There, however, he was quite happy, for he was a great lover of
hunting, fishing, and walking: he understood painting, read much, and
played upon several instruments; so that he was glad to be freed from
the fantastic humours of Furibon. One day as he was walking in the
garden, finding the heat increase, he retired into a shady grove, and
began to play upon the flute to amuse himself. As he played, he felt
something wind about his leg, and looking down saw a great adder: he
took his handkerchief, and catching it by the head, was going to kill
it. But the adder, looking steadfastly in his face, seemed to beg his
pardon. At this instant one of the gardeners happened to come to the
place where Leander was, and spying the snake, cried out to his
master, "Hold him fast, sir; it is but an hour since we ran after him
to kill him: it is the most mischievous creature in the world."

Leander, casting his eyes a second time upon the snake, which was
speckled with a thousand extraordinary colours, perceived the poor
creature still looked upon him with an aspect that seemed to implore
compassion, and never tried in the least to defend itself.

"Though thou hast such a mind to kill it," said he to the gardener,
"yet, as it came to me for refuge, I forbid thee to do it any harm;
for I will keep it, and when it has cast its beautiful skin I will let
it go." He then returned home, and carrying the snake with him, put it
into a large chamber, the key of which he kept himself, and ordered
bran, milk, and flowers to be given to it, for its delight and
sustenance; so that never was snake so happy. Leander went sometimes
to see it, and when it perceived him it made haste to meet him,
showing him all the little marks of love and gratitude of which a poor
snake was capable, which did not a little surprise him, though,
however, he took no further notice of it.

In the meantime all the court ladies were extremely troubled at his
absence, and he was the subject of all their discourse. "Alas!" cried
they, "there is no pleasure at court since Leander is gone, of whose
absence the wicked Furibon is the cause!" Furibon also had his
parasites, for his power over the queen made him feared; they told him
what the ladies said, which enraged him to such a degree that in his
passion he flew to the queen's chamber, and vowed he would kill
himself before her face if she did not find means to destroy Leander.
The queen, who also hated Leander, because he was handsomer than her
son, replied that she had long looked upon him as a traitor, and
therefore would willingly consent to his death. To which purpose she
advised Furibon to go a-hunting with some of his confidants, and
contrive it so that Leander should make one of the party.

"Then," said she, "you may find some way to punish him for pleasing
everybody."

Furibon understood her, and accordingly went a-hunting; and Leander,
when he heard the horns and the hounds, mounted his horse, and rode to
see who it was. But he was surprised to meet the prince so
unexpectedly: he alighted immediately, and saluted him with respect;
and Furibon received him more graciously than usual, and bade him
follow him. All of a sudden he turned his horse, and rode another way,
making a sign to the ruffians to take the first opportunity to kill
him; but before he had got quite out of sight, a lion of prodigious
size, coming out of his den, leaped upon Furibon: all his followers
fled, and only Leander remained; who, attacking the animal sword in
hand, by his valour and agility saved the life of his most cruel
enemy, who had fallen in a swoon from fear. When he recovered, Leander
presented him his horse to remount. Now, any other than such a wretch
would have been grateful: but Furibon did not even look upon him: nay,
mounting the horse, he rode in quest of the ruffians, to whom he
repeated his orders to kill him. They accordingly surrounded Leander,
who, setting his back to a tree, behaved with so much bravery, that he
laid them all dead at his feet. Furibon, believing him by this time
slain, rode eagerly up to the spot. When Leander saw him, he advanced
to meet him. "Sir," said he, "if it was by your order that these
assassins came to kill me, I am sorry I made any defence."

"You are an insolent villain!" replied Furibon, "and if ever you come
into my presence again, you shall surely die."

Leander made no answer, but retired sad and pensive to his own home,
where he spent the night in pondering what was best for him to do,
for there was no likelihood he should be able to defend himself
against the power of the king's son; therefore he at length concluded
he would travel abroad and see the world. Being ready to depart, he
recollected his snake, and, calling for some milk and fruits, carried
them to the poor creature for the last time; but on opening the door
he perceived an extraordinary lustre in one corner of the room, and
casting his eye on the place he was surprised to see a lady, whose
noble and majestic air made him immediately conclude she was a
princess of royal birth. Her habit was of purple satin, embroidered
with pearls and diamonds; and advancing towards him with a gracious
smile--

"Young prince," said she, "you find no longer your pet snake, but me,
the Fairy Gentilla, ready to requite your generosity. For know, that
we fairies live a hundred years in flourishing youth, without
diseases, without trouble or pain; and this term being expired, we
become snakes for eight days. During that time it is not in our power
to prevent any misfortune that may befall us; and if we happen to be
killed, we never revive again. But these eight days being expired, we
resume our usual form, and recover our beauty, our power, and our
riches. Now you know how much I am obliged to your goodness, and it is
but just that I should repay my debt of gratitude: think how I can
serve you and depend on me."

The young prince, who had never conversed with a fairy till now, was
so surprised that it was a long time before he could speak. But at
length, making a profound reverence, "Madam," said he, "since I have
had the honour to serve you, I know not any other happiness that I can
wish for."

"I should be sorry," replied she, "not to be of service to you in
something; consider, it is in my power to bestow on you long life,
kingdoms, riches: to give you mines of diamonds, and houses full of
gold; I can make you an excellent orator, poet, musician, and painter;
or, if you desire it, a spirit of the air, the water, or the earth."

Here Leander interrupted her: "Permit me, madam," said he, "to ask you
what benefit it would be to me to be a spirit?"

"Much," replied the fairy; "you would be invisible when you pleased,
and might in an instant traverse the whole earth; you would be able to
fly without wings, to descend into the abyss of the earth without
dying, and walk at the bottom of the sea without being drowned; nor
doors, nor windows, though fast shut and locked, could hinder you from
entering anywhere; and whenever you had a mind, you might resume your
natural form."

"Oh, madam!" cried Leander, "then let me be a spirit; I am going to
travel, and should prefer it above all those other advantages you have
so generously offered me."

Gentilla thereupon stroking his face three times, "Be a spirit," said
she; and then, embracing him, she gave him a little red cap with a
plume of feathers. "When you put on this cap, you shall be invisible;
but when you take it off, you shall again become visible."

Leander, overjoyed, put his little red cap upon his head, and wished
himself in the forest, that he might gather some wild roses which he
had observed there: his body immediately became as light as thought;
he flew through the window like a bird; though, in flying over the
river, he was not without fear, lest he should fall into it, and the
power of the fairy not be able to save him. But he arrived in safety
at the rose-bushes, plucked three roses, and returned immediately to
his chamber; presented his roses to the fairy, overjoyed that his
first experiment had succeeded so well. She bade him keep the roses,
for that one of them would supply him with money whenever he wanted
it; that if he put the other into his mistress's bosom, he would know
whether she was faithful or not; and that the third would keep him
always in good health. Then, without staying to receive his thanks,
she wished him success in his travels and disappeared.

Leander, infinitely pleased, settled his affairs, mounted the finest
horse in the stable, called Gris-de-line, and attended by some of his
servants in livery, made his return to court. Now you must know
Furibon had given out, that had it not been for his courage Leander
would have murdered him when they were a-hunting; so the king, being
importuned by the queen, gave orders that Leander should be
apprehended. But when he came, he showed so much courage and
resolution that Furibon ran to the queen's chamber, and prayed her to
order him to be seized. The queen, who was extremely diligent in
everything that her son desired, went immediately to the king.
Furibon, being impatient to know what would be resolved, followed her;
but stopped at the door, and laid his ear to the keyhole, putting his
hair aside that he might the better hear what was said. At the same
time, Leander entered the court-hall of the palace with his red cap
upon his head, and perceiving Furibon listening at the door of the
king's chamber, he took a nail and a hammer, and nailed his ear to the
door. Furibon began to roar, so that the queen, hearing her son's
voice, ran and opened the door, and, pulling it hastily, tore her
son's ear from his head. Half out of her wits, she set him in her lap,
took up his ear, kissed it, and clapped it again upon its place; but
the invisible Leander, seizing upon a handful of twigs, with which
they corrected the king's little dogs, gave the queen several lashes
upon her hands, and her son as many on the nose: upon which the queen
cried out, "Murder! murder!" and the king looked about, and the people
came running in; but nothing was to be seen. Some cried that the queen
was mad, and that her madness proceeded from her grief to see that her
son had lost one ear; and the king was as ready as any to believe it,
so that when she came near him he avoided her, which made a very
ridiculous scene. Leander, then leaving the chamber, went into the
garden, and there, assuming his own shape, he boldly began to pluck
the queen's cherries, apricots, strawberries, and flowers, though he
knew she set such a high value on them, that it was as much as a man's
life was worth to touch one. The gardeners, all amazed, came and told
their majesties that Prince Leander was making havoc of all the fruits
and flowers in the queen's garden.

"What insolence!" said the queen: then turning to Furibon, "My pretty
child, forget the pain of thy ear but for a moment, and fetch that
vile wretch hither; take our guards, both horse and foot, seize him,
and punish him as he deserves."

Furibon, encouraged by his mother, and attended by a great number of
armed soldiers, entered the garden, and saw Leander; who, taking
refuge under a tree, pelted them all with oranges. But when they came
running towards him, thinking to have seized him, he was not to be
seen; he had slipped behind Furibon, who was in a bad condition
already. But Leander played him one trick more; for he pushed him down
upon the gravel-walk, and frightened him so that the soldiers had to
take him up, carry him away, and put him to bed.

Satisfied with this revenge, he returned to his servants, who waited
for him, and giving them money, sent them back to his castle, that
none might know the secret of his red cap and roses. As yet he had not
determined whither to go; however, he mounted his fine horse
Gris-de-line, and, laying the reins upon his neck, let him take his
own road: at length he arrived in a forest, where he stopped to
shelter himself from the heat. He had not been above a minute there
before he heard a lamentable noise of sighing and sobbing; and looking
about him, beheld a man, who ran, stopped, then ran again, sometimes
crying, sometimes silent, then tearing his hair, then thumping his
breast like some unfortunate madman. Yet he seemed to be both handsome
and young: his garments had been magnificent, but he had torn them all
to tatters. The prince, moved with compassion, made towards him, and
mildly accosted him: "Sir," said he, "your condition appears so
deplorable, that I must ask the cause of your sorrow, assuring you of
every assistance in my power."

"Oh, sir," answered the young man, "nothing can cure my grief; this
day my dear mistress is to be sacrificed to a rich old ruffian of a
husband who will make her miserable."

"Does she love you then?" asked Leander.

"I flatter myself so," answered the young man.

"Where is she?" continued Leander.

"In a castle at the end of this forest," replied the lover.

"Very well," said Leander; "stay you here till I come again, and in a
little while I will bring you good news."

He then put on his little red cap, and wished himself in the castle.
He had hardly got thither before he heard all sorts of music; he
entered into a great room, where the friends and kindred of the old
man and the young lady were assembled. No one could look more amiable
than she; but the paleness of her complexion, the melancholy that
appeared in her countenance, and the tears that now and then dropped,
as it were by stealth, from her eyes, betrayed the trouble of her
mind.

Leander now became invisible, and placed himself in a corner of the
room. He soon perceived the father and mother of the bride; and coming
behind the mother's chair, whispered in her ear, "If you marry your
daughter to that old dotard, before eight days are over you shall
certainly die." The woman, frightened to hear such a terrible sentence
pronounced upon her, and yet not know from whence it came, gave a loud
shriek, and dropped upon the floor. Her husband asked what ailed her:
she cried that she was a dead woman if the marriage of her daughter
went forward, and therefore she would not consent to it for all the
world. Her husband laughed at her, and called her a fool. But the
invisible Leander accosting the man, threatened him in the same way,
which frightened him so terribly, that he also insisted on the
marriage being broken off. When the lover complained, Leander trod
hard upon his gouty toes, and rang such an alarum in his ears, that,
not being able any longer to hear himself speak, away he limped, glad
enough to go. The real lover soon appeared, and he and his fair
mistress fell joyfully into one another's arms, the parents consenting
to their union. Leander, assuming his own shape, appeared at the
hall-door, as if he were a stranger drawn thither by the report of
this extraordinary wedding.

From hence he travelled on, and came to a great city, where, upon his
arrival, he understood there was a great and solemn procession, in
order to shut up a young woman, against her will, among the vestal
nuns. The prince was touched with compassion; and thinking the best
use he could make of his cap was to redress public wrongs and relieve
the oppressed, he flew to the temple, where he saw the young woman,
crowned with flowers, clad in white, and with her dishevelled hair
flowing about her shoulders. Two of her brothers led her by each hand,
and her mother followed her with a great crowd of men and women.
Leander, being invisible, cried out, "Stop, stop, wicked brethren:
stop, rash and inconsiderate mother; if you proceed any further, you
shall be squeezed to death like so many frogs." They looked about, but
could not conceive from whence these terrible menaces came. The
brothers said it was only their sister's lover, who had hid himself in
some hole; at which Leander, in wrath, took a long cudgel, and they
had no reason to say the blows were not well laid on. The multitude
fled, the vestals ran away, and Leander was left alone with the
victim; immediately he pulled off his red cap, and asked her wherein
he might serve her. She answered him, that there was a certain
gentleman whom she would be glad to marry, but that he wanted an
estate. Leander then shook his rose so long, that he supplied them
with ten millions; after which they married, and lived happily
together.

But his last adventure was the most agreeable. Entering into a wide
forest, he heard lamentable cries. Looking about him every way, at
length he spied four men well armed, who were carrying away by force a
young lady, thirteen or fourteen years of age; upon which, making up
to them as fast as he could, "What harm has that girl done?" said he.

"Ha, ha! my little master," cried he who seemed to be the ringleader
of the rest, "who bade you inquire?"

"Let her alone," said Leander, "and go about your business."

"Oh yes, to be sure," cried they, laughing; whereupon the prince
alighting, put on his red cap, not thinking it otherwise prudent to
attack four who seemed strong enough to fight a dozen. One of them
stayed to take care of the young lady, while the three others went
after Gris-de-line, who gave them a great deal of unwelcome exercise.

Meantime the young lady continued her cries and complaints: "Oh my
dear princess," said she, "how happy was I in your palace! Did you but
know my sad misfortune, you would send your Amazons to rescue poor
Abricotina."

Leander, having listened to what she said, without delay seized the
ruffian that held her, and bound him fast to a tree, before he had
time or strength to defend himself. He then went to the second, and
taking him by both arms, bound him in the same manner to another
tree. In the meantime Abricotina made the best of her good fortune,
and betook herself to her heels, not knowing which way she went. But
Leander, missing her, called out to his horse Gris-de-line; who, by
two kicks with his hoof, rid himself of the two ruffians who had
pursued him: one of them had his head broken; and the other, three of
his ribs. And now Leander only wanted to overtake Abricotina; for he
had thought her so handsome that he wished to see her again. He found
her leaning against a tree. When she saw Gris-de-line coming towards
her, "How lucky am I!" cried she; "this pretty little horse will carry
me to the Palace of Pleasure." Leander heard her, though she saw him
not: he rode up to her; Gris-de-line stopped, and when Abricotina
mounted him, Leander clasped her in his arms, and placed her gently
before him. Oh, how great was Abricotina's fear to feel herself fast
embraced, and yet see nobody! She durst not stir, and shut her eyes
for fear of seeing a spirit. But Leander took off his little cap: "How
comes it, fair Abricotina," said he, "that you are afraid of me, who
delivered you out of the hands of the ruffians?"

With that she opened her eyes, and knowing him again, "Oh sir," said
she, "I am infinitely obliged to you; but I was afraid, for I felt
myself held fast, and could see no one."

"Surely," replied Leander, "the danger you have been in has disturbed
you, and cast a mist before your eyes."

Abricotina would not seem to doubt him, though she was otherwise
extremely sensible. And after they had talked for some time of
indifferent things, Leander requested her to tell him her age, her
country, and by what accident she fell into the hands of the ruffians.

"Know then, sir," said she, "there was a certain very great fairy
married to a prince who wearied of her; she therefore banished him
from her presence, and established herself and daughter in the Island
of Calm Delights. The princess, who is my mistress, being very fair,
has many lovers--among others, one named Furibon, whom she detests: he
it was whose ruffians seized me to-day when I was wandering in search
of a stray parrot. Accept, noble prince, my best thanks for your
valour, which I shall never forget."

Leander said how happy he was to have served her, and asked if he
could not obtain admission into the island. Abricotina assured him
this was impossible, and therefore he had better forget all about it.
While they were thus conversing, they came to the bank of a large
river: Abricotina alighting with a nimble jump from the horse--

"Farewell, sir," said she to the prince, making a profound reverence,
"I wish you every happiness."

"And I," said Leander, "wish that I may now and then have a small
share in your remembrance."

So saying, he galloped away, and soon entered into the thickest part
of a wood, near a river where he unbridled and unsaddled Gris-de-line;
then, putting on his little cap, wished himself in the Island of Calm
Delights, and his wish was immediately accomplished.

The palace was of pure gold, and stood upon pillars of crystal and
precious stones, which represented the zodiac, and all the wonders of
nature; all the arts and sciences; the sea, with all the variety of
fish therein contained; the earth, with all the various creatures
which it produces; the chases of Diana and her nymphs; the noble
exercises of the Amazons; the amusements of a country life; flocks of
sheep with their shepherds and dogs; the toils of agriculture,
harvesting, gardening. And among all this variety of representations,
there was neither man nor boy to be seen--not so much as a little
winged Cupid: so highly had the princess been incensed against her
inconstant husband, as not to show the least favour to his fickle sex.

"Abricotina did not deceive me," said Leander to himself; "they have
banished from hence the very idea of men; now let us see what they
have lost by it." With that he entered into the palace, and at every
step he took, he met with objects so wonderful, that when he had once
fixed his eyes upon them he had much ado to take them off again. He
viewed a vast number of these apartments, some full of china, no less
fine than curious; others lined with porcelain, so delicate, that the
walls were quite transparent. Coral jasper, agates, and cornelians
adorned the rooms of state, and the presence-chamber was one entire
mirror. The throne was one single pearl, hollowed like a shell; the
princess sat, surrounded by her maidens, none of whom could compare
with herself. In her was all the innocent sweetness of youth, joined
to the dignity of maturity; in truth, she was perfection; and so
thought the invisible Leander.

Not seeing Abricotina, she asked where she was. Upon that, Leander,
being very desirous to speak, assumed the tone of a parrot, for there
were many in the room; and addressing himself invisibly to the
princess,--

"Most charming princess," said he, "Abricotina will return
immediately. She was in great danger of being carried away from this
palace, but for a young prince who rescued her."

The princess was surprised at the parrot, his answer was so extremely
pertinent:

"You are very rude, little parrot," said the princess; "and
Abricotina, when she comes, shall chastise you for it."

"I shall not be chastised," answered Leander, still counterfeiting the
parrot's voice; "moreover, she will let you know the great desire that
stranger had to be admitted into this palace, that he might convince
you of the falsehood of those ideas which you have conceived against
his sex."

"In truth, pretty parrot," cried the princess, "it is a pity you are
not every day so diverting I should love you dearly."

"Ah! if prattling will please you, princess," replied Leander, "I
will prate from morning till night."

"But," continued the princess, "how shall I be sure my parrot is not a
sorcerer?"

"He is more in love than any sorcerer can be," replied the prince.

At this moment Abricotina entered the room, and falling at her lovely
mistress's feet, gave her a full account of what had befallen her, and
described the prince in the most glowing colours.

"I should have hated all men," added she, "had I not seen him! Oh,
madam, how charming he is! His air and all his behaviour have
something in them so noble; and though whatever he spoke was
infinitely pleasing, yet I think I did well in not bringing him
hither."

To this the princess said nothing, but she asked Abricotina a hundred
other questions concerning the prince; whether she knew his name, his
country, his birth, from whence he came, and whither he was going; and
after this she fell into a profound thoughtfulness.

Leander observed everything, and continued to chatter as he had
begun--

"Abricotina is ungrateful, madam," said he; "that poor stranger will
die for grief if he sees you not."

"Well, parrot, let him die," answered the princess, with a sigh; "and
since thou undertakest to reason like a person of wit, and not like a
little bird, I forbid thee to talk to me any more of this unknown
person."

Leander was overjoyed to find that Abricotina's and the parrot's
discourse had made such an impression on the princess. He looked upon
her with pleasure and delight. "Can it be," said he to himself, "that
the masterpiece of nature, that the wonder of our age, should be
confined eternally in an island, and no mortal dare to approach her?
But," continued he, "wherefore am I concerned that others are banished
hence, since I have the happiness to be with her, to see her, to hear
and to admire her; nay more, to love her above all the women in the
universe?"

It was late, and the princess retired into a large room of marble and
porphyry, where several bubbling fountains refreshed the air with an
agreeable coolness. As soon as she entered, the music began, a
sumptuous supper was served up, and the birds from several aviaries on
each side of the room, of which Abricotina had the chief care, opened
their little throats in the most agreeable manner.

Leander had travelled a journey long enough to give him a good
appetite, which made him draw near the table, where the very smell of
such viands was agreeable and refreshing. The princess had a curious
tabby-cat, for which she had a great kindness. This cat one of the
maids of honour held in her arms, saying, "Madam, Bluet is hungry!"
With that a chair was presently brought for the cat; for he was a cat
of quality, and had a necklace of pearl about his neck. He was served
on a gold plate, with a laced napkin before him; and the plate being
supplied with meat, Bluet sat with the solemn importance of an
alderman.

"Ho, ho!" cried Leander to himself; "an idle tabby malkin, that
perhaps never caught a mouse in his life, and I dare say is not
descended from a better family than myself, has the honour to sit at
table with my mistress: I would fain know whether he loves her so well
as I do."

Saying this, he placed himself in the chair with the cat upon his
knee, for nobody saw him, because he had his little red cap on;
finding Bluet's plate well supplied with partridge, quails, and
pheasants, he made so free with them, that whatever was set before
master puss disappeared in a trice. The whole court said no cat ever
ate with a better appetite. There were excellent ragouts, and the
prince made use of the cat's paw to taste them; but he sometimes
pulled his paw too roughly, and Bluet, not understanding raillery,
began to mew and be quite out of patience. The princess observing it,
"Bring that fricassee and that tart to poor Bluet," said she; "see how
he cries to have them."

Leander laughed to himself at the pleasantness of this adventure; but
he was very thirsty, not being accustomed to make such large meals
without drinking. By the help of the cat's paw, he got a melon, with
which he somewhat quenched his thirst; and when supper was quite over,
he went to the beaufet, and took two bottles of delicious wine.

The princess now retired into her boudoir, ordering Abricotina to
follow her and make fast the door; but they could not keep out
Leander, who was there as soon as they. However, the princess,
believing herself alone with her confidante--

"Abricotina," said she, "tell me truly, did you exaggerate in your
description of the unknown prince, for methinks it is impossible he
should be as amiable as you say?"

"Madam," replied the damsel, "if I have failed in anything, it was in
coming short of what was due to him."

The princess sighed, and was silent for a time; then resuming her
speech: "I am glad," said she, "thou didst not bring him with thee."

"But, madam," answered Abricotina, who was a cunning girl, and already
penetrated her mistress's thoughts, "suppose he had come to admire the
wonders of these beautiful mansions, what harm could he have done us?
Will you live eternally unknown in a corner of the world, concealed
from the rest of human kind? Of what use is all your grandeur, pomp,
magnificence, if nobody sees it?"

"Hold thy peace, prattler," replied the princess, "and do not disturb
that happy repose which I have enjoyed so long."

Abricotina durst make no reply; and the princess, having waited her
answer for some time, asked her whether she had anything to say.
Abricotina then said she thought it was to very little purpose her
mistress having sent her picture to the courts of several princes,
where it only served to make those who saw it miserable; that every
one would be desirous to marry her, and as she could not marry them
all, indeed none of them, it would make them desperate.

"Yet, for all that," said the princess, "I could wish my picture were
in the hands of this same stranger."

"Oh, madam," answered Abricotina, "is not his desire to see you
violent enough already; would you augment it?"

"Yes," cried the princess; "a certain impulse of vanity, which I was
never sensible of till now, has bred this foolish fancy in me."

Leander heard all this discourse, and lost not a tittle of what she
said; some of her expressions gave him hope, others absolutely
destroyed it. The princess presently asked Abricotina whether she had
seen anything extraordinary during her short travels?

"Madam," said she, "I passed through one forest where I saw certain
creatures that resembled little children: they skip and dance upon the
trees like squirrels; they are very ugly, but have wonderful agility
and address."

"I wish I had one of them," said the princess; "but if they are so
nimble as you say they are, it is impossible to catch one."

Leander, who passed through the same forest, knew what Abricotina
meant, and presently wished himself in the place. He caught a dozen of
little monkeys, some bigger, some less, and all of different colours,
and with much ado put them into a large sack; then, wishing himself at
Paris, where, he had heard, a man might have everything for money, he
went and bought a little gold chariot. He taught six green monkeys to
draw it; they were harnessed with fine traces of flame-coloured
morocco leather. He went to another place, where he met with two
monkeys of merit, the most pleasant of which was called Briscambril,
the other Pierceforest--both very spruce and well educated. He dressed
Briscambril like a king, and placed him in the coach; Pierceforest he
made the coachman; the others were dressed like pages; all which he
put into his sack, coach and all.

The princess not being gone to bed, heard a rumbling of a little coach
in the long gallery; at the same time, her ladies came to tell her
that the king of the dwarfs was arrived, and the chariot immediately
entered her chamber with all the monkey train. The country monkeys
began to show a thousand tricks, which far surpassed those of
Briscambril and Pierceforest. To say the truth, Leander conducted the
whole machine. He drew the chariot where Briscambril sat arrayed as a
king, and making him hold a box of diamonds in his hand, he presented
it with a becoming grace to the princess. The princess's surprise may
be easily imagined. Moreover, Briscambril made a sign for Pierceforest
to come and dance with him. The most celebrated dancers were not to be
compared with them in activity. But the princess, troubled that she
could not guess from whence this curious present came, dismissed the
dancers sooner than she would otherwise have done, though she was
extremely pleased with them.

Leander, satisfied with having seen the delight the princess had taken
in beholding the monkeys, thought of nothing now but to get a little
repose, which he greatly wanted. He stayed some time in the great
gallery; afterwards, going down a pair of stairs, and finding a door
open, he entered into an apartment the most delightful that ever was
seen. There was in it a bed of cloth of gold, enriched with pearls,
intermixed with rubies and emeralds; for by this time there appeared
daylight sufficient for him to view and admire the magnificence of
this sumptuous furniture. Having made fast the door, he composed
himself to sleep. Next day he rose very early, and looking about on
every side, he spied a painter's pallet, with colours ready prepared
and pencils. Remembering what the princess had said to Abricotina
touching her own portrait, he immediately (for he could paint as well
as the most excellent masters) seated himself before a mirror, and
drew his own picture first; then, in an oval, that of the princess. He
had all her features so strong in his imagination, that he had no
occasion for her sitting; and as his desire to please her had set him
to work, never did portrait bear a stronger resemblance. He had
painted himself upon one knee, holding the princess's picture in one
hand, and in the other a label with this inscription--"She is better
in my heart." When the princess went into her cabinet, she was amazed
to see the portrait of a man; and she fixed her eyes upon it with so
much the more surprise, because she also saw her own with it, and
because the words which were written upon the label afforded her ample
room for curiosity She persuaded herself that it was Abricotina's
doing; and all she desired to know was, whether the portrait were real
or imaginary. Rising in haste, she called Abricotina, while the
invisible Leander, with his little red cap, slipped into the cabinet,
impatient to know what passed. The princess bid Abricotina look upon
the picture, and tell her what she thought of it.

After she had viewed it, "I protest," said she, "'tis the picture of
that generous stranger to whom I am indebted for my life. Yes, yes, I
am sure it is he; his very features, shape, and hair."

"Thou pretendest surprise," said the princess, "but I know it was thou
thyself who put it there."

"Who! I, madam?" replied Abricotina; "I protest, I never saw the
picture before in my life. Should I be so bold as to conceal from your
knowledge a thing that so nearly concerns you? And by what miracle
could I come by it? I never could paint, nor did any man ever enter
this place; yet here he is painted with you."

"Some spirit, then, must have brought it hither," cried the princess.

"How I tremble for fear, madam!" said Abricotina. "Was it not rather
some lover? And therefore, if you will take my advice, let us burn it
immediately."

"'Twere a pity to burn it," cried the princess, sighing; "a finer
piece, methinks, cannot adorn my cabinet." And saying these words, she
cast her eyes upon it. But Abricotina continued obstinate in her
opinion that it ought to be burnt, as a thing that could not come
there but by the power of magic.

"And these words--'She is better in my heart,'" said the princess;
"must we burn them too?"

"No favour must be shown to anything," said Abricotina, "not even to
your own portrait."

Abricotina ran away immediately for some fire, while the princess went
to look out at the window. Leander, unwilling to let his performance
be burnt, took this opportunity to convey it away without being
perceived. He had hardly quitted the cabinet, when the princess turned
about to look once more upon that enchanting picture, which had so
delighted her. But how was she surprised to find it gone! She sought
for it all the room over; and Abricotina returning, was no less
surprised than her mistress; so that this last adventure put them both
in the most terrible fright.

Leander took great delight in hearing and seeing his incomparable
mistress; even though he had to eat every day at her table with the
tabby-cat, who fared never the worse for that; but his satisfaction
was far from being complete, seeing he durst neither speak nor show
himself; and he knew it was not a common thing for ladies to fall in
love with persons invisible.

The princess had a universal taste for amusement. One day, she was
saying to her attendants that it would give her great pleasure to know
how the ladies were dressed in all the courts of the universe. There
needed no more words to send Leander all over the world. He wished
himself in China, where he bought the richest stuffs he could lay his
hands on, and got patterns of all the court fashions. From thence he
flew to Siam, where he did the same; in three days he travelled over
all the four parts of the world, and, from time to time, brought what
he bought to the Palace of Calm Delights, and hid it all in a chamber,
which he kept always locked. When he had thus collected together all
the rarities he could meet with--for he never wanted money, his rose
always supplying him--he went and bought five or six dozen of dolls,
which he caused to be dressed at Paris, the place in the world where
most regard is paid to fashions. They were all dressed differently,
and as magnificent as could be, and Leander placed them all in the
princess's closet. When she entered it, she was agreeably surprised to
see such a company of little mutes, every one decked with watches,
bracelets, diamond buckles, or necklaces; and the most remarkable of
them held a picture-box in its hand, which the princess opening, found
it contained Leander's portrait. She gave a loud shriek, and looking
upon Abricotina, "There have appeared of late," said she, "so many
wonders in this place, that I know not what to think of them:--my
birds are all grown witty; I cannot so much as wish, but presently I
have my desires; twice have I now seen the portrait of him who rescued
thee from the ruffians; and here are silks of all sorts, diamonds,
embroideries, laces, and an infinite number of other rarities. What
fairy is it that takes such care to pay me these agreeable
civilities?"

Leander was overjoyed to hear and see her so much interested about his
picture, and calling to mind that there was in a grotto which she
often frequented a certain pedestal, on which a Diana, not yet
finished, was to be erected, on this pedestal he resolved to place
himself, crowned with laurel, and holding a lyre in his hand, on which
he played like another Apollo. He most anxiously waited the princess's
retiring to the grotto, which she did every day since her thoughts had
been taken up with this unknown person; for what Abricotina had said,
joined to the sight of the picture, had almost destroyed her repose:
her lively humour changed into a pensive melancholy, and she grew a
great lover of solitude. When she entered the grotto, she made a sign
that nobody should follow her, so that her young damsels dispersed
themselves into the neighbouring walks. The princess threw herself
upon a bank of green turf, sighed, wept, and even talked, but so
softly that Leander could not hear what she said. He had put his red
cap on, that she might not see him at first; but having taken it off,
she beheld him standing on the pedestal. At first she took him for a
real statue, for he observed exactly the attitude in which he had
placed himself, without moving so much as a finger. She beheld with a
kind of pleasure intermixed with fear, but pleasure soon dispelled her
fear, and she continued to view the pleasing figure, which so exactly
resembled life. The prince having tuned his lyre, began to play, at
which the princess, greatly surprised, could not resist the fear that
seized her; she grew pale, and fell into a swoon. Leander leaped from
the pedestal, and putting on his little red cap, that he might not be
perceived, took the princess in his arms, and gave her all the
assistance that his zeal and tenderness could inspire. At length she
opened her charming eyes, and looked about in search of him, but she
could perceive nobody; yet she felt somebody who held her hands,
kissed them, and bedewed them with his tears. It was a long time
before she durst speak, and her spirits were in a confused agitation
between fear and hope. She was afraid of the spirit, but loved the
figure of the unknown. At length she said: "Courtly invisible, why are
you not the person I desire you should be?" At these words, Leander
was going to declare himself, but durst not do it yet; "For," thought
he, "if I again affright the object I adore, and make her fear me, she
will not love me." This consideration caused him to keep silence.

The princess, then, believing herself alone, called Abricotina and
told her all the wonders of the animated statue; that it had played
divinely, and that the invisible person had greatly assisted her when
she lay in a swoon.

"What pity 'tis," said she, "that this person should be so frightful,
for nothing can be more amiable or acceptable than his behaviour!"

"Who told you, madam," answered Abricotina, "that he is frightful? If
he is the youth who saved me, he is beautiful as Cupid himself."

"If Cupid and the unknown are the same," replied the princess,
blushing, "I could be content to love Cupid; but alas! how far am I
from such a happiness! I love a mere shadow; and this fatal picture,
joined to what thou hast told me, have inspired me with inclinations
so contrary to the precepts which I received from my mother, that I am
daily afraid of being punished for them."

"Oh! madam," said Abricotina, interrupting her, "have you not troubles
enough already? Why should you anticipate afflictions which may never
come to pass?"

It is easy to imagine what pleasure Leander took in this conversation.

In the meantime, the little Furibon, still enamoured of the princess
whom he had never seen, expected with impatience the return of the
four servants whom he had sent to the Island of Calm Delights. One of
them at last came back, and after he had given the prince a particular
account of what had passed, told him that the island was defended by
Amazons, and that unless he sent a very powerful army, it would be
impossible to get into it. The king his father was dead, and Furibon
was now lord of all: disdaining, therefore, any repulse, he raised an
army of four hundred thousand men, and put himself at the head of
them, appearing like another Tom Thumb upon a war-horse. Now, when the
Amazons perceived his mighty host, they gave the princess notice of
it, who immediately despatched away her trusty Abricotina to the
kingdom of the fairies, to beg her mother's instructions as to what
she should do to drive the little Furibon from her territories. But
Abricotina found the fairy in an angry humour.

"Nothing that my daughter does," said she, "escapes my knowledge. The
Prince Leander is now in her palace; he loves her, and she has a
tenderness for him. All my cares and precepts have not been able to
guard her from the tyranny of love, and she is now under its fatal
dominion. But it is the decree of destiny, and I must submit;
therefore, Abricotina, begone! nor let me hear a word more of a
daughter whose behaviour has so much displeased me."

Abricotina returned with these ill tidings, whereat the princess was
almost distracted; and this was soon perceived by Leander, who was
near her, though she did not see him. He beheld her grief with the
greatest pain. However, he durst not then open his lips; but
recollecting that Furibon was exceedingly covetous, he thought that,
by giving him a sum of money, he might perhaps prevail with him to
retire. Thereupon, he dressed himself like an Amazon, and wished
himself in the forest, to catch his horse. He had no sooner called him
than Gris-de-line came leaping, prancing, and neighing for joy, for he
was grown quite weary of being so long absent from his dear master;
but when he beheld him dressed as a woman he hardly knew him. However,
at the sound of his voice, he suffered the prince to mount, and they
soon arrived in the camp of Furibon, where they gave notice that a
lady was come to speak with him from the Princess of Calm Delights.
Immediately the little fellow put on his royal robes, and having
placed himself upon his throne, he looked like a great toad
counterfeiting a king.

Leander harangued him, and told him that the princess, preferring a
quiet and peaceable life to the fatigues of war, had sent to offer his
majesty as much money as he pleased to demand, provided he would
suffer her to continue in peace; but if he refused her proposal, she
would omit no means that might serve for her defence. Furibon replied
that he took pity on her, and would grant her the honour of his
protection; but that he demanded a hundred thousand thousand millions
of pounds, and without which he would not return to his kingdom.
Leander answered that such a vast sum would be too long a-counting,
and therefore, if he would say how many rooms full he desired to have,
the princess was generous and rich enough to satisfy him. Furibon was
astonished to hear that, instead of entreating, she would rather offer
more; and it came into his wicked mind to take all the money he could
get, and then seize the Amazon and kill her, that she might never
return to her mistress. He told Leander, therefore, that he would have
thirty chambers of gold, all full to the ceiling. Leander, being
conducted into the chambers, took his rose and shook it, till every
room was filled with all sorts of coin. Furibon was in an ecstasy, and
the more gold he saw the greater was his desire to get hold of the
Amazon; so that when all the rooms were full, he commanded his guards
to seize her, alleging she had brought him counterfeit money.
Immediately Leander put on his little red cap and disappeared. The
guards, believing that the lady had escaped, ran out and left Furibon
alone; when Leander, availing himself of the opportunity, took the
tyrant by the hair, and twisted his head off with the same ease he
would a pullet's; nor did the little wretch of a king see the hand
that killed him.

Leander having got his enemy's head, wished himself in the Palace of
Calm Delights, where he found the princess walking, and with grief
considering the message which her mother had sent her, and on the
means to repel Furibon. Suddenly she beheld a head hanging in the air,
with nobody to hold it. This prodigy astonished her so, that she could
not tell what to think of it; but her amazement was increased when she
saw the head laid at her feet, and heard a voice utter these words:

    "Charming princess, cease your fear
    Of Furibon; whose head see here."

Abricotina, knowing Leander's voice, cried: "I protest, madam, the
invisible person who speaks is the very stranger that rescued me."

The princess seemed astonished, but yet pleased.

"Oh," said she, "if it be true that the invisible and the stranger are
the same person, I confess I shall be glad to make him my
acknowledgments."

Leander, still invisible, replied, "I will yet do more to deserve
them;" and so saying he returned to Furibon's army, where the report
of the king's death was already spread throughout the camp. As soon
as Leander appeared there in his usual habit, everybody knew him; all
the officers and soldiers surrounded him, uttering the loudest
acclamations of joy. In short, they acknowledged him for their king,
and that the crown of right belonged to him, for which he thanked
them, and, as the first mark of his royal bounty, divided the thirty
rooms of gold among the soldiers. This done, he returned to his
princess, ordering the army to march back into his kingdom.

The princess was gone to bed. Leander, therefore, retired into his own
apartment, for he was very sleepy--so sleepy that he forgot to bolt
his door; and so it happened that the princess, rising early to taste
the morning air, chanced to enter into this very chamber, and was
greatly astonished to find a young prince asleep upon the bed. She
took a full view of him, and was convinced that he was the person
whose picture she had in her diamond box. "It is impossible," said
she, "that this should be a spirit; for can spirits sleep? Is this a
body composed of air and fire, without substance, as Abricotina told
me?" She softly touched his hair, and heard him breathe and looked at
him as if she could have looked for ever. While she was thus occupied,
her mother, the fairy, entered with such a dreadful noise that Leander
started out of his sleep. But how deeply was he afflicted, to behold
his beloved princess in the most deplorable condition! Her mother
dragged her by the hair, and loaded her with a thousand bitter
reproaches. In what grief and consternation were the two young lovers,
who saw themselves now upon the point of being separated for ever! The
princess durst not open her lips, but cast her eyes upon Leander, as
if to beg his assistance. He judged rightly, that he ought not to deal
rudely with a power superior to his own, and therefore he sought, by
his eloquence and submission, to move the incensed fairy. He ran to
her, threw himself at her feet, and besought her to have pity upon a
young prince, who would never change in his affection for her
daughter. The princess, encouraged, also embraced her mother's knees,
and declared that without Leander she should never be happy.

"Happy!" cried the fairy, "you know not the miseries of love, nor the
treacheries of which lovers are capable. They bewitch us only to
poison our lives; I have known it by experience; and will you suffer
the same?"

"Is there no exception, madam?" replied Leander, and his countenance
showed him to be one.

But neither tears nor entreaties could move the implacable fairy; and
it is very probable that she would never have pardoned them, had not
the lovely Gentilla appeared at that instant in the chamber, more
brilliant than the sun. Embracing the old fairy,--

"Dear sister," said she, "I am persuaded you cannot have forgotten the
good office I did you when, after your unhappy marriage, you besought
a readmittance into Fairyland; since then I never desired any favour
at your hands, but now the time is come. Pardon, then, this lovely
princess; consent to her nuptials with this young prince. I will
engage he shall be ever constant to her; the thread of their days
shall be spun of gold and silk; they shall live to complete your
happiness; and I will never forget the obligation you lay upon me."

"Charming Gentilla," cried the fairy, "I consent to whatever you
desire. Come, my dear children, and receive my love." So saying, she
embraced them both.

Abricotina, just then entering, cast her eyes upon Leander: she knew
him again, and saw he was perfectly happy, at which she, too, was
quite satisfied.

"Prince," condescendingly said the fairy-mother, "I will remove the
Island of Calm Delights into your own kingdom, live with you myself,
and do you great services."

Whether or not Prince Leander appreciated this offer, he bowed low,
and assured his mother-in-law that no favour could be equal to the one
he had that day received from her hands. This short compliment pleased
the fairy exceedingly, for she belonged to those ancient days when
people used to stand a whole day upon one leg complimenting one
another. The nuptials were performed in a most splendid manner, and
the young prince and princess lived together happily for many years,
beloved by all around them.




THE WOODCUTTER'S DAUGHTER.


There was once a poor woodcutter, very miserable, though prudent and
industrious; he had a wife and three grown-up sons, yet their united
labours scarcely sufficed for bread. No hope appeared of improving his
lot, when he was one day fortunate enough to save the life of his
master when attacked by robbers in the forest.

This master was not ungrateful; he desired the woodcutter to repair to
him on the following day in order to receive a reward. The poor man
did not fail, hoping to gain two or three crowns; for it appeared so
natural to defend an unarmed man that he attached little value to his
services, considering his own danger not worth a thought. He put on
his best array, shaved, and made many reverences to the porter and the
numerous lackeys previous to an introduction to the master, who was
much more polite than the valets.

"Well, Thomas," said he, "how can I recompense what you have done for
me? Without your assistance I should have perished; and as my life is
a very happy one, I value it accordingly."

Poor Thomas was at a loss how to reply; he stammered out, "My
Lord--your Grace," but could get no further.

The master, in order to relieve the poor man, interrupted him thus: "I
understand better than yourself, perhaps, what would suit you; I would
not wish to draw you from your native condition, for I believe that
none is more truly happy; but I present to you and your children's
children, in perpetuity, the cottage which you inhabit in the forest.
You and they shall have the power of cutting as much wood every year
as you can use; you shall work for yourself; and if your sons like to
hunt, all the game which they kill shall be for their own use. I only
exact that you sell nothing, and that while possessing every comfort,
you seek not to quit your peaceful obscurity."

Thomas was so astonished that he could find no words to express his
gratitude. He came home to his wife, who heartily shared his joy. The
sons immediately set off for a large supply of faggots, and made a
great fire; but when they had been thoroughly warmed, Mother Thomas
began to say what a pity it was they could make no use of all the wood
which was not burned.

"An idea has just struck me," replied the husband; "our master gives
us all we can _use_; these are his own words,--very well; I shall be
able to use enough to bring us in a pretty little income!"

"How?" said his wife.

"When I was a boy," rejoined the woodcutter, "my father taught me to
make wooden shoes and I made them so light and so neat, that they were
everywhere sought for. What need now prevent me from exercising this
trade? James shall cut wood in the forest, Peter shall kill game for
dinner, and Paul, who has not the least brains of the three, shall go
to sell my merchandise at the neighbouring town. This will be a public
benefit, by enabling the poor about us to dress with more decency and
comfort, and it will also serve to furnish our own cottage, of which
we shall make a little palace."

The boys, who were present, highly relished this idea. Mother Thomas,
who was rather inclined to gluttony, made the most of the game which
Peter provided. A little labour, good cheer, a blazing fire, and
perfect family concord, rendered this family the happiest in the
world. The master came to the cottage, and seeing them so united and
industrious, encouraged the trade of the wooden shoes, which increased
their comforts without exposing them to the vices attendant on avarice
and luxury.

But happiness such as this seldom remains permanent. A flock of
furious wolves appeared in the forest; every day they devoured either
helpless children or travellers; they tore up the roots of the trees,
attacking even each other, while their wild howlings were heard night
and day in the cottage of the woodcutter.

Mother Thomas would no longer suffer her boys to leave home; and when
they did go in spite of her, she remained watching at the door
refusing either to eat or drink until they returned.

Such a situation was deplorable; when at length the young men, who
were very brave, resolved to deliver themselves and their master.
Taking arms, in case they should be attacked, they went into the
forest and digged deep pits, covering them with a little earth, laid
over some branches of trees; and during this heavy labour, which
lasted several days, they lighted great fires around them, in order to
hinder the wolves from approaching.

Success crowned their enterprise, for in returning to the spot at
sunrise, they perceived that one of the pits had been broken into
during the night, and that it was now quite uncovered. They charged
their muskets, and each were disputing the honour of first firing,
when they heard issue from the depths below, a mild and supplicating
voice imploring assistance.

"What shall we do?" said Peter; "assuredly that is not the roaring of
a wolf; it is, perhaps